#+STARTUP: customtime
#+HUGO_BASE_DIR: ./website/
#+HUGO_SECTION: assignment
#+HUGO_STATIC_IMAGES: Images
#+HUGO_MENU: :menu main :parent Assignments
#+HUGO_AUTO_SET_LASTMOD: t
#+MACRO: ts (eval (mwp-get-ts+7  'org-mwp-classtimes-calibrate 2))

#+begin_src emacs-lisp
  ;;etq org-mwp-classtimes-calibrate '("<2019-01-03 Thu>" "<2019-01-01 Tue>" ))
(mwp-get-ts+7  'org-mwp-classtimes-calibrate 2)
org-mwp-classtimes-calibrate


#+end_src

#+RESULTS:
| <01/15> | <01/10> | <01/08> | <01/03> | <01/01> |

* COMMENT Hugo Instructions
- Every exportable entry must have the ~EXPORT_FILE_NAME~ property set before export.
- I should write some code to shunt this stuff to ox-huveal instead of ox-hugo.  This is a project for another time.
- interestingly, I probably don't want to set ox-hugo-auto-export-on-save for this file, because my most urgent need is going to be to export local reveal files.  Exporting to hugo -- or huveal if I can figure that out -- will be difficult.
- so, maybe I want to repurpose some of the auto-export code for use with my lectures!


** Check out this elisp code if you're having trouble

#+begin_src emacs-lisp
(use-package ox-hugo-auto-export)

#+end_src

#+RESULTS:


* {{{n}}} Modernity and Legibility
HIS389H1S-L0601

01: Modernity and Legibility

Summary:

Explain a bit about the aims of the course

I. Science and Modernity

Some time around 1800, Western world began to change in a rapid and
ddramatic fashion. Propositions that had been taken for granted in the
Western world for a very long time -- concerning the stability of the
social and political order, the basic structures of daily life, naure of
power, the ordering o1f mental and emotional states, the relationship of
humans to the natural world -- were rapidly and aggresively called into
question. The next 100 years or so were probabaly as explosively
transformative a time as any in human history.

Who I am, why I want to teach this class, what my goals are, what I'm
worried about?

-research interests (history is an angel flying backwards into the
future)

-real name of class is "science, technology and modernity" and I teach
it b/c I love the material.

-feel very viscerally dilemma of modernity: simultaneous beauty and
terror of storm of change; dangers and possibilities of cultural mixing;
arrogance and wonder of the colonial encounter.

-believe we live in world c.19 made for us, that we inherit our great
hopes and worst nightmares from it.

-believe therefore that c. 19 has both the usual exotic character of
historical study, /and/ a real intimacy in the nature of its dilemmas.

-also think that in this story, science and technology play a role both
greater and far more richly textured than are usually given credit for;
and hence want to structure the course around study of them.

-goal, then, is to inflict some of this emotional landscape on you; also
the usual, e.g.:

-familiarize you with tiny fraction of important primary and secondary
literature;

-make you think very hard about historical interpretation;

-also, /strongly/ encourage you to treat history of science and
technology as integral to study of history more broadly, which I think
is important

-main worry is, in past taught this class (1) as lecture course, (2)
with much higher reading load, (3) mostly to his of sci students. am a
little nervous that it won't work so very well in this format. would
like to formally take stock of class after 4 weeks & also after first
paper.

-wierd fact: climbing accident

Couple of main themes will push throughout the course:

-"double vision" of modernity: progress, or better, constant directed
change, as salvation, doom, or both. apocalyptic visions mingled with
Utopian dreams.

-modernity as transformation of both society and individual

-science and tech as part of /culture/, not as some driving force
external to history; but nonetheless /central/ to any understanding of
c. 19.



II. Modernization, Modernism, Modernity

-mod, thy. most famously, thy of development which asserts that large
number of social, economic, and political factors characteristic of
"modernity" in Europe and esp. US will bundle together; most influential
in pol. sci. important for us isthat has a certain Marxian flavor to
it - not in its poll. stripes , but in its rough determinism.

-(a) explicit movement with particular aesthetic goals, (b) stance which
embraces the modern condition positively,

-condition of being modern:

berman: There is a mode of vital experience -- experience of apce and
time, of the self and others, of life's possibilities and perils-- that
is shared by men and women all over the world today... To be modern is
to find ourselves in an environment that promises us adventure, power,
joy, growth, transformation of ourselves and the world-- and, at the
same time, that threatens to destroy everything we have, eveerything we
know, everything we are.

-something close to what berman means: modernity is condition where "all
that is solid melts into air".

-question: what does it meant obe a modern individual? What range of
emotions is open to us? What

Add long section on theories of Modernity:

Horkheimer and Adorno, WWII, tragic view

Foucault

Modernization Theory

Elias

Weber

Marx

III. Tragic and Comic Views of Modernity

needs expansion (write 4 paragraphs)

tragedy vs. comedy

Marx

Go Over Syllabus!!!

IV. For next week:

-reading is heavy: basically two books (!) but we need to do them
together.

-Frankenstein: you all sort of know the plot. want you to watch for (1)
any complexities in discussion of science; ask: what is romantic about
this text? and, do I think that the romantic vision could be called
modern?

-Faust: this story you sort of know, but not really. b/c you're not
reading the whole book, quick plot summary: Faust, immensely learned,
studies magic, gets involved with Mephistopheles, a demon who has made a
Job-like pact with God, and who is probably not a different entity from
Satan. Mephistopheles gives Faust godlike powers; faust falls in love
with a sweet, innocent young thing; Faust's fatal quest for knowledge
and power creates untold misery for her; she dies tragically, and
ascends to heaven (end part I). In Part II, which no one reads, Faust
abandons love and after mourning, undertakes management of a kingdom;
sets out on massive public works projects, building cities, razing
forests, asserting godlike powers.

-Goethe wrote Faust over period of 60 years (!), 1770-1831.

-major changes in his life, politics.

-ALSO: many people somehow fail to know that Goethe was not only a poet
but (a) a massively important natural philosopher (~=scientist) (optics,
Elective Affinities, Botany), (b) a hugely powerful minister in Saxony.
Faust II written much more with this life history of Goethe's in mind,
e.g. like Faust, managed huge forests.

-really crucial part for us is Faust II. try to think: what is tragic,
what comic in this depiction. how does Goethe present to us the dilemma
of modernization?

-ALSO: if you don't speak German: Gretel, Gretchen, and Gretelchen are
all nicknames for Margarete. So don't get confused.


* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Brief version of "romanticism"
3 parts to today's lecture:

1. Schelling's Philosohie of Nature

2. Goethe's History

   Goethe as scientist,writer, and administrator.

   Scientist: Urbild, Urplanze. Nature as opposing forces...

   Asministrator:

2. Faustian Myths and bargains...

Schelling, 1797: (Allgemeine Uebersicht der neusten philosophischen
Literatur)

because there is in our spirit an infinite striving to organize itself,
so in the outer world must a general tendency to organization reveal
itself... The world system is a dkind of organization, which has formed
itself from a common centre. The powers of chemical matter are already
beyond the boundaries of the merely mechanical. Even raw materials which
separate out of a common medium crystallize out as sregular figures. The
general formative drive [Bildungstrieb] in nature loses itself finally
in an infinitude, which even the prepared eye is unable to measure....
It is the general Spirit of nature, whuch gradually forms the raw matter
into itself. From moss, in which the trace of organization is hardly
visible, to the noble Form, whuch seems to have shed the chains of
matter, there rules one and the same drive within, which strives to work
according to one and the same Ideal of Purposefulness, strives to
express /ad infinitumj/ one and the same Original Imabe [/Urbild/], the
pURE fORM OF OUR sPIRIT.

Oken,

Physio-philosophy is, therefore, the generative history of the world, or
in general temrs, the History of Creation... Man is the summit, the
crown of nature's development, and must comprehend everything that has
preceded him, even as the gruit includes within aitself all the earlier
developed parts of the plant. In a word, Man must representt he whole
world in miniature. Now since in Man are manifested self-consciousness
or spirit, physio-philosophy has to show that the laws of spirit are not
different from the laws of nature, but that both are transcripts or
likenesses of each other.... The whole of physio-philosophy de\pends,
consequently, upon the demonstration of the parallelism that exists
between the activities of nature and spirit.

Kant: (3^{rd} critique)

an organized being is, therefore, not a mere machine. For a machine has
solely motive power, whereas an organized being possesses inherent
formative power, and such, moreover, as it can impart to materiual
devoid of it..

Goethe (see quotes)
"


* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Many verysoins of tnlightenment stuff

** Enlightenment From Reason to Labour Power
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: enlightenment-from-reason-to-labour-power
  :EXPORT_FILE_NAME: enlightenment-from-reason-to-labour
  :END:

To do:

review reading at work

make outline for projection.

make imagess for scott?

write \guiding questions, make copies.

Scott:

Legibility: making world /readable/. What's involved in this project?

Dorinda Outram, /The Enlightenment/ (Cambridge, Cambridge UP, 199?)

*** O. Introduction
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: o.-introduction
   :END:

 Last week I talked about the general themes of the course, and in
particular introduced the thesis that the nineteenth century saw the
development of a distinct form of experience in that period -- an
experience of the world as flux, of history as progress, of science and
technology as the fundamental engines that drove the grand drama of
human development.

It may seem odd, therefore, that today's lectures, and this week's
readings, take us back into the depths of the Eighteenth century. I will
be making two separate but interrelated points today. The first lecture
focusses on the work of Adam Smith and its various effects on the moral
and natural sciences in the nineteenth century. The second hour
(assuming I get there!) will discuss the emergence of the steam engine
as the most important technological development of the late eighteenth
century, and its transformation into one of the most important
/metaphors/ of the nineteenth. And in a roundabout way I'll try to bring
the two together at the end.

*** Enlightenment
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: enlightenment
   :END:

In literature about the origins of “modernity”, the period called the
eEnlightenment looms large. A number of important philosophers -- Max
Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno in their /Dialectic of Enlightenment/,
Juergen Hbermas in his /Structural Transformiton of the public Sphere/,
Michel Foucault in /The Order of Things/ -- take eriod from around 1700
to 1785 or so as /emblematic/ of modernity. The ideals of Enightenment
thinkers, they argued, were the ideals of an approaching modern world.
By analysing them, our contemporaries have hoped to discover something
about the structurs that underly our own era.

Today|s lecture will take us back to the 18^{th} century for a quick
historical review of the Enlightenment. We want to know:

-What was the Enlightenment, where did it take place, with wha names was
it associated?

-Was there a coherent body of thought associated with the Enlightenment?

-What was the role of /natural philosopy/, or the study of the natural
world, in the Enlightenment?

-how did Enlightenment thinkers understand the relaiton between reason
and the State?

*** I The Enlightenment -- a brief history.
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: i-the-enlightenment-a-brief-history.
   :END:

What was the Enlightenment? Writing in 1784, the Prussian philosopher
Immanuel Kant thought he had the answer: Enlightenment, he said, is
“Man's release from his self-incurred immaturity.” Enlightenment, for
Kant, was simultaneously a /historical/ process and an intellectual one.
*Abstract* entity “Enlightenment”, which it had always been possible to
attain; but “Enlightenment” was also a /process which human society in
Europe was purportedly undergoing at the very time of writing. /

So term “Enl” has always carried with it a sense of poth philosophical
and historical import. To be enlightened was to achieve insight, but
also to participate in a broader development in the history of human
societies. *Certasin tension in confrontation of philosophical and
historical views. Is Enlightenment a period or a process?*

We usually think of the Enlightenment as a period in intellectual and
cultural history stretching from the last days of the 17^{th} Century to
sometime near the end of the 18^{th} -- usually ending either shortly
before or shortly after the French Revolution. The most famous thinkers
of the Enlightenment lived in France, in the German-speaking lands east
of the French kingdom, and in the recently-annexed kingdom of Scotland
in the British Empire.

It was fashionable, until fairly recently, to speak of the Enlightenment
as a fairly coherent body of thought which united the most important
thinkers of this era -- Gottriefd Wilhelm Leibniz, Immanuel Kant, Denis
Diderot, Voltaire, Jean-Jacques Rousseau,, Adam Smith, John Locke --
around a small number of themes. All of these writers, whatevertheir
differences, believed in the emancipatory powecr of rReason to guide
human affairs, and understood their philosophy as a quest after tools
that might enable the eventual bettecrment of the human condition.
Intellectual historians like Peter Gay accepted Immanuel Kant's
definition of Enlightenment: “man's release from his self-incurred
immaturity,” whether the Enlightenment was Scottish, French, or German.

This view of the enlightenment as a /unity/ is less popular today than
it was 10 or 20 years ago, as more careful analysis of both the
/content/ of Enlightenment thought, and the /ontext/ in which it was
produced, has revealed substantial divergences within the canon of
“enlightened” thinkers. How does one reconcile, for instance, Rousseau's
rejection of human cultivation, his valorization of the “state of
Nature”, with Concorcet's eloquently-stated faith in unfailing human
progress? Insdtead of seeing Enl. As a unitary phenomenon, might be more
useful to see it as a period in which (1) certain material conditions
obtained, creating the conditions of possibility of a lively,
internaitonal, widespread intellectual conversation (more on this next
week); and (2) a time when a wide range of writers focussed their
attention on a few key issues. ThFor sake of simplicity, might say that
Enlightenment philosophy was above all ocncerned with delineating the
/role of reason in the ocnduct of h uman affairs. /

**** The Role of reason
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: the-role-of-reason
    :END:

Reason was the capacity to coldly grasp a problem and objectively
consider it, andthus achieve an understanding of that problem's
solutions that /all/ rational beings would accept. Reason was one road
to /univerality/ of conclusions, as had long been believed in, e.g.
Medieval theology or mathematics.

But there had always been other roads to Truth /besides/ Reason. In
particular, of course, /Faith/ . But picture is also a bit more complex
than that, e.g., history of /wonder/. Wonder -- shock of confrontation
with unknown -- was, in e.g. The 17^{th} century, understood as an
important means of attaining knowledge. Scientist Robert Boyle, for
instance, described his /wonderment -- his amazement -- at lurid
phenomena as a / n /enticement/ to learn more about them. Knowledge
depended on /engagement/, not just /abstraction/, and for that reason
wonder was important. Therefore natural philosophers sought out “marvels
of nature” -- phenomena that seemed to stretch the limits of the
possible, e.g. Glowing meat, monstrous births, portentous objects -- as
key to understanding Nature as a whole. The /exceptional/ as the key to
the /rule/.

For most of the philosophers associated with the “Enlightenment,” this
sense of wonder was interpreted as a problem. e.g, Adam Smith, who spoke
of natural philosophic inquiry as the process of /banishing/ the awkward
and unpleasant sense of wonder, and /replacing / it with certainty. (cf.
Daston and Park on passion of inquiry).

Study of “marvels,” then, became increasingly unimportant for
Enlightenment natural philosphers -- key was to discover the /rules
which governed the ordinary courseo f events/, not to be distracted by
the exception. Over-enthusiastic embrace of extraordinary was suspect
and, increasingly, vulgar.

Enthusiasm, superstition, imagination. These are dangerous sentiments,
sentiments of theunwashed masses uncleansed by thel ight of philosophy.

e.g., John Spencer on “prodigy-mongers: (Daston/Parks 335)

How mean a regard shall the issues of the severest debates, and the
ocmmands of Authority find, if every pitiful Prodigy-monger have credit
enough with the People to blast them, by ftelling them that heaven
frowns upon the laws, and that God writes his displeasure against them
in black and visible Characters when some sad accident befals the
complyers with them?

This criticism of /imagination/ fand /enthusiasm/ took all kinds of
targets. e.g. The /virtuoso/:

cf. Outram, p.47.

Most famous, of course, were the diatribes against /enthusiastic
religiosity/. In fact for much of the 20^{th} century, “Enlightenment”
portrayed as /anti-religious/ or /anti-christian/ movement. Certainly
some of the most important French /philosophes/ -- the Enlightenment
thinkers -- advocated atheism and agnosticism. Baron d'Holbach, Swiss
financier and dogged materialist, attacked organized rligion of all
kinds; Julien Offroy de La Mettrie (1709-1751), author of /L'Homme
Machine/, who denied the reality of the soul. Voltaire in his 1765
/Questions sur les miracles/ questioned whether miracles had taken place
as often as they were alleged to in the Bible; David Hume doubted the
plausibility of any account of miracles. These and other authors also
wondered whether the Bible could be counted on as a reliable source of
informaiton.

But more often, the so-called “anti-religious” thinkers of Enlightenment
were more precisely /anti-superstition/. They fattacked religious
practices they saw as irrational, destructive, contrary to demonstrable
fact. Voltaire, in /Candide/, satirizes the superstiion of the Catholic
sailors on the ship carriying Candide to America, but he does not deny
the existence of God; in fact, in response to Holbach's /Systeme de la
Nature /in 1770, Voltaire declared that belief in the existence of God
was /the most reaonable ocnclusion/.

Similarly, One of the earliest works of the Enlightenment is John
Locke's /The Reaonableness of Christianity/; one of the latest is kant's
/Religion within the limits of Reason Alone. /Both were attempts to
demonstrate that Christian religiosity could, in fact, be grounded
solely on reason. (not thatthis is wholly new...).

Still, even the most imporatn /advocates/ of Reason could be guardedi n
their faith. e.g. Kant in /Was ist Auifklaerung/, stating /public/ use
of reason should by free, but not /private/ use of reason. And Rousseau
as constant exception.

**** Ideology of reason and Reasonableness...
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: ideology-of-reason-and-reasonableness...
    :END:

Just b/c they bleived in an ideology of reason doesn't mean Enlightened
thinkers were always reasonable by our standards. cf., e.g, exoticism,
treatment of “others” as ahistorical; compare with colonialist
arguments. That is, not always most perceptive critics of themselves.

**** Natural Sciences
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: natural-sciences
    :END:

no such thing as “science” in this era (term c oined in 1830's). instead
“nat phil,” carried on in conjunciton iwht other fparts of philosophical
inquiry.

-institutions of science: much, much, much weaker than they are today.
No professionals. Nonetheless:

-scientific societies, e.g. Royal Society, various Royal Academies of
Science. Networks of letter-writing (“republic of letters”) . Early days
of a newly-expanded print culture.

-substantial concern with matters of natural-philosophical import.

-Newtonian universe. /Vis viva/ debate. Cause of inertia, gravitation.

-state of the earth. Fixity of species, earth's crust, longevity of
time.

**** Reason of State
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: reason-of-state
    :END:

cf foucault on “governmentality”

What is relation betwn knowledge, reason, and state?

-enlightened despotism. Joseph II of Austiria, Frederick II of Prussia.

-Physiocratie. Anne-Robert Turgot (1727-81) [encyclopedi\ste; Finance
Minister 1774-76. supports free market for wheat, leads to /Guerre des
Farines, 1775/), Quesnay (1694-1774) [surgeon to Louis XV; cf. Droit
Naturel, 1765. .

-in centural Europe: Cameralism: science of adminstration. Importance of
wealth. Virtues of strong government. /Social regulation!!!/ as part of
state objectives (not just /dynastic aspirations./ *Government as a
machine for production of desired ends*.

-Monarchical legitimacy as rootedi n natural law (that is, monraCH
PROVIDES FOR /NATURAL/ NEEDS, IS THEREFORE LEGIT).

-ALSO BOTH NATURE NAD ECONOMY OPEN TO 'MANAGEMENT' AND EXPLOITATION TO
MEET NEEDS OF THE STATE.

-role of monarch: *first bureaucrat*.

2. ** Gathering Knowledge: the Encyclopedia
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: gathering-knowledge-the-encyclopedia
      :END:

   Diderot, denis (1713-84) [from provincial family of artisans and
   work-shop owners; took minor orders 1726; rejects personal God, sees
   dnature and matter as full of energies, ocnstantly in transformation.
   Also preaches secular morality, starazes prejudices against adultery,
   sexual repression.

   , Jean le Rond dit D'Alembert (1717-83) [illegitimate son of salon
   hostess Claudine de Tensin, famous mathematician. Slaon frequenter.
   Wrote ca. 1400 articles for the Encyclopedie]

   , attempt to bring all knowledge under one heAD. WHAT'S THE POINT OF
   THIS ENTERPRISE? To unify knowledge is a /utopian impulse with a
   /socially imporoving/ goal. /

   Notes from “D'alembert: Science and Enlightenment, by Hankins.

   -huge financial endeavor (4 mil frnacs), 2.5 mill profit for pubs.
   Huge investment for encyclopedistes/.

1745: Diderot & D'Alembert hired to translate Cyclopedia (Ephraim
Chambers, 1728).

D'alembert stays till 1758\ (7^{th} vol):

attack by gov't: “The rights [of society, religion, and the state] have
been violated, their laws disregarded. Impeity walks with head held
high...humanity shudders, the citizenry is alrmed. Can one conceal from
oneself that there is a project formed, fa Society organized, to
propagate materialismn, to destroy Religion, to inspire a spirit of
independence, and to nourish the corruption of morals?

*** III. Condorcet: Progress...
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: iii.-condorcet-progress...
   :END:

Marie Jean Antoine Nicoleas de Caritat Condorcet (1743-94)

-mathematician whom we will encounter later when we talk about
probability. Invented voting method. Attempts to develop a social
mathematics and social physics. Girondin in the French Revolution,
fwrites a constitution, which is rejected; opposess execution of the
King, hides, attempts to escape, dies in prison.

Vision: of prefec tability of man.

p. 3 : time will ocme when sun shines only on free men...

7: progressive improvement of sciences and arts.

9: semiotic improvement.

11: power of education.

Smith....

*** IV. Adam Smith and the Division of Labour
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: iv.-adam-smith-and-the-division-of-labour
   :END:

Adam Smith was born sometime shortly before June 5, 1723 in the town of
Kirkcaldy, Scotland, about a decade and a half after the so-called "Act
of Union" officially bound Scotland as a territory of Great Britain. His
father, a local government official, having died some six months before
his son's birth, Smith was raised by his mother in the twon of his birth
until the age of 15, when he attended Glasgow University for several
years before moving on to study at Oxford -- a path that was not
uncommon in an era when the provincial universities were seen as mere
preparatory schools for the advanced study of clasical subjects at
Cambridge and Oxford. In 1746 Smith returned to Scotland, and in
Edinburgh befriended the towering intellectual presence of the age,
David Hume, before moving to Glasgow to teach Logic and, shortly
thereafter, Moral Philosophy. In 1759 Smith published his first major
work, the /Theory of Moral Sentiments/, and four years thereafter he
resigned his post in Glasgow to take up a lucrative job tutoring the
young Duke of Buccleuch. (cf. Hegel). For the next two or three years
Smith travelled with his charge, mostly in France, where Smith made the
acquaintance of some of the leading figures of the Enlightenment ("Les
Lumières"), including the mathematician d'Alembert, who wouldl ater
write the introduction to the most important work of the French
Enlightnment, Diderot's /Encyclopédie/, and also François Quesnay, the
leading figure among the Physicocrats, an important school of economic
thought whose work Smith deeply respected, though his own economic
writings would later be seen as the antithesis of all that the
physiocrats stood for. The physiocrats wanted to treat the State and the
Political Economy as /natural entities/, subject to natural laws in the
way that the rest of the universe was. Many of the were medical doctors,
and they discussed the "circulation" of goods in terms of the
"circulation" of the blood, whose mechanism had been described by
William Harvey in 1616. The physiology of the organism was, for the
physiocrats, analogous to the /physiology/ ofsociety -- hence their
name, "physiocrats" -- and the talked about uniting the study of
"animal" and "social" economics. Though their conclusions about how
economics works, etc, were radically different from those of Smith,
their eim, to /treat of the natural laws which governed politics and
economics/ , was extraordinarily influential on Smith.

Smith returned to Scotland in 1764 and lived variously in Glasgow and
Edinburgh until his death in June of 1790, about a year after the
outbreak of the French Revolution. His mosti mportant wor, entitled "An
Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations," was
published in 1776, the year of the American Rebellion.

Some lessons to be learned from his biography:

-Smith was a key figure in what has come to be known as "the Scottish
Enlightenment." Enlightnment was a widespread, very diverse,
intellectual movement of the Eighteenth Century, whose significance has
paradoxiacally become harder and harder to describe over the last 30
years, as more and more sophisticated analyses of Enlightenment
philosophy have been produced. In Germany, "Enlightenment" ewas most
closely associated with the works of Immanuel Kant, in Scotland with
David Hume ,and in France with the circle around Denis Diderot, known as
the /Encyclopédistes/. In Scotland, Enlightenment thinkers mixed French
ideas of freedom, rationality, and progress with a specific nationalist
falvour born of resentments over the recent annexation of Scotland by
England. In fact the traffic with French philosophy was much easier for
the Scottish than it was for the English, for whom France still
represented the eternal enemy.

-the subordinate status of Scotland that Smith and his contemporaries
were far more concerned with the lower disciplines -- the arts and
practical sciences -- than were their counterparts at Oxford and
Cambridge. Thus Glasgow nad Edinburgh became the seat of an animated and
vibrant engagement with practical life in a way that would have been
unthinkable in Oxbridge culture of the time.

-Smith was a moral and social philosopher as much as he was an
economist. /The Wealth of Nations/ is often read in isolation from the
rest of Smith's work as the inauguration of a separate discipline of
scientific economics. In fact Smith's economics was deeply integrated
into his system of moral reasoning nadh is account of human history, to
both of which we shall return shortly. In fact, the very phrase
"invisible hand" occurs in /Theory of Moral Sentiments/ almost two
decades before the publication of /Wealth of Nations/.

But let's turn for now to the /WN/ itself. The very first paragraph is
probably the most famous in the entire work, and justly so. Smith "The
greatest improvement in the productive powers of labour," says Smith, "
and the greater part of the skill, dexterity, and judgment with which it
is any where directed, or applied, seem to have been the effects of the
division of labour." (can someone recount for me how this is supposed to
work?)

Now, the seems like a simple claim. In fact it's quite elaborate, and
examining it more closely reveals quite a bit about Smith and his time.
Wrapped up in this single claim are:

-a theory of human nature

-a theory of history

**** Div'n of Labour -- how it works
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: drivn-of-labour----how-it-works
    :END:

-law of the div'n of labour unites many disparate phenomena under one
rubric, as did (in c. 17) the law of falling bodies. part of general
enthusiasm for Newtonianism, in which the Physiocrats & other
Enlightenment philosophes also participated. Attempt to uncover, by
reference to concrete empirical examples, the underlying natural laws
that unified the diverse phenomena with which we are confronted.
"clockwork" universe. Div'n of labour should be unerstood as a similar
undertaking.

-in the first chapter of the book. Smith establishes by example that the
division of labour is a great good. The famous example of the pins,
which as we'll see later on is repeated over the course of the next 50
years and is also not an example chosen at random, but in fact
represents one of the most extreme cases of div'n of labour available to
study in the c. 19, and had been remarked on by others before Smith,
shows that div'n of labour can enable a massive increase in a worker's
productivity. A single individual, Smith says, is not capable of making
20 pins in a day. But put 10 persons together in an
appropriately-designed workshop, assign each of them a task, and they
can make 48,000 pins a day, or at least 240 times as much as they would
otherwise be able to make. Why? 3 reasons (par 5-8):

-as one restricts oneself to a single task, one's facility in that task
vastly increases, so that each worker, even if not particularly gifted,
becomes a amaster artisan of a very narrowly-restricted craft. *skill
increased, not diminished*.

-time saved: we lose inordinate amounts of time when we switch rapidly
between tasks, rather than focussing on single task fat hand. ddiv'n of
labour diminishes this.

-most astounding to modern ear: that "invention of... machines... seems
to have been originally owing to the division of labour. Men are much
morel ikely to discover easier nad readier methods of attaining any
object, when the whole attention of their minds is directed towards that
single object, than when it is disssipated among a great variety of
things." (par. 8) div'n of labour makes workers into inventors. Has
therefore tremendous potential for moral uplift nad intellectual
improvement, by /concentrating/ mental and physical powers of the
individual

-- but div'n of labour is a principle, not only of the /microcosm/ of
the individual workshop, but of the /macrocosm/ of the society at large
-- just as /gravity/ is a law governing motion of bodies in /microcosm/
of earthly events and /macrocosm/ of the stars and planets. Smith's text
moves out from the miniscule portrait of the workshop to a majestic,
God's-eye view of the whole universe of economic activity, which he
shows to be governed by the principle of division oflabour. Just as
workers in a factory divide their tasks among themselves, so too do the
citizens of a society, again vastly increasing the efficiency of
economic production. "It is the great multiplication of the productions
of all the different arts, in consequence of the division of labour,
which occasions, in a well-governed socity, that universal opulence
which extends itself to the lowest ranks of the people," he says in par
10. By turning to a single occupation, each individual is able to
produce a tremeendous surplus, and exchange that surplus for a quantity
of goods she would never have been able to produce herself. In fact --
as he tells us in par 11 -- each tiny commodity, when examined closely,
reveals its intricate dependence on a huge variety of economic
activities, all co-ordinated and orchestrated in the most perfectly
ordained mainner. "The woollen coat... which covers the day-labourer, as
course and rough as it may appear, is the produce of the joint labour of
a great multitude of workmen." (who?)

-the image is one of a beautific harmony, where the great masses of
humanity unknowingly, and with as perfect as a co-ordination as the
inhabitants of any beehive, work together with each other for their own
mutual benefit. As Smith tells us, Äthis div'n of labour, from which so
many advantages are derived, is not originally the effect of any human
wisdom, which forsees and intends that general opulence to which it
gives occasion." Then how does this come about?

**** Human Nature and the Division of Labour
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: human-nature-and-the-division-of-labour
    :END:

-in fact, as it turns out, this harmony has been ordained by God. How?
bf/c God has so fashioned human nature as to make the division of labour
/inevitable/. The creator has imbued humanity -- and humanity alone --
with "the propensity to truck, barter, and exchange one thing for
another."

-it is through truck and barrter alone that we obtain almost everything
we require -- and not material goods alone, but those mutual assurances
of aid which we require for survival.

-and it also gave rise to the div'n of labour. Finding that one has a
natural disposition to do some thing better than another, one finds that
one can, say, trade that item for other items -- and "find at last that
one can in this manner get more cattle and venison, thani if he himself
went to the field to catch them. From a regard to his own interest,
therefore, the making of bows and arrows grows to be his chief business,
and he becomes a sort of armourer."(I.ii.3)

-because we are capable and desirous of exchange, we are inevitably led
to the division of labour. Moreover (and this is less obvious from the
parts of WN that you've just read) the great good which div'n of labour
brings about is achieved solely by the efforts of individuals who are
out for their own good. Here Smith is following in the footsteps of
Bernard Mandeville (1670-1733), a Dutch physician who moved to London at
the age of 29, and authored a famous attack on the prudish Earl of
Shaftesbury entitled /The Fable of the Bees: or, Private vices, Publick
Virtue/. Mandevi lle argued that people are governed by greed and
self-interest alone; but that these vices, when aggregated, in fact
produced the best of all possible worlds. That is, he suggested that
vice, wickedness, egoism, greed were all necessary to the achievement of
social goods.

-Smith agrees. In the /Theory of Moral Sentiments/, he had already said
something similar. The rich, he said, "consume little more than the
poor, and in spite of their naturla selfishness and rapacity, though
they mean only their own conveniency, though the sole end which they
propose from the labours of al lthe thousands whom they employ, be the
gratification of their own vain and insatiable desires, they divide with
the poor the produce of all their improvements. They are led by an
invisible hand to make nearly the same distribution of the necessaries
of life, which would have been made had the earth been divided into
equal portions among all its inhabitants.... and thus without intending
it... advance the interest of the society. ... When Providence divided
the earth among a few lordly masters, it neither forgot nor abandoned
those who seemd to have been left out..."(IV.i.10)

-Smith elaborates on this same theme later on in the 'WN. "As every
individual... endeavours as much as he can to employ his captal in
thesupport of domestick industry,... every individual necessarily
labours to render the annual revenue of the society as great as he can.
He generally, indeed, neither intends to promote the poublick interest,
nor knows how much he is promoting it... he is in this, asi n many other
cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was not part of
his intention." (IV.ii.10)

-so narrow self-interest, through the means of div'n of labour, leads
inevitable and /providentially/ to social development (stress
/providence)/.

**** Theory of History
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: theory-of-history
    :END:

Brings us to the question of historical development, really only hinted
at in the sections you describe. At end of ch 1, Smith comments that the
material wealth and comfort of an ordinary Scottish peasant vastly
"exceeds that of many an African king, the absolute master of the lives
and liberties of ten thousand naked savages." ((I.i.11) Implicit in this
comparison is an argument that African (or, in an earlier draft, Indian,
or North American) societies are in some way less developed than
Scottish society. This lack of development is not, it would seem, due to
an innate difference in the capacities of the races, since Smith is at
pains in Ch. 2 to assert that man (at least) are much more similari n
their natural talents than we suppose. Instead, Smith has a rather
elaborate theory of history which he expounds elsewhere in great detail.
He asserts that there are four stages of human history:

-hunting society

-pastoralist societies

-agricultural societyies

-commercial societies

European states are in the final and highest stage of development, to
which they had been brought by the inevitable unfolding of the logic of
div'n of labour. (in primitive societies div'n of labourt much less
developed).

-human nature constant; social conditions create divergent human
capacities.

Smith's theories of Human Nature and history are linked. The
propensities of self-interest and exchange which Providence has
instilled in human nature inexorably produce a progressive betterment of
the human condition through the elaboration of the division of labour.
Providence arranges for the gred of one individual to be ballanced
against the greed of others, so that our vices work together to create
harmony and prosperity (opulence).

-This view of an ordained and inevitable progress of human development
was deeply characteristic of the Enlightenment. (Condorcet, /Esquisse
d'un tableau historique des progrès de l'esprit humain/, 1795).
"Comedic" view of modernity -- progress orchestrated from above, like
clockwork, to the inevitable benefit of all.

-one interesting fact about Smith is his lack of interest in complex
machinery. in fact, world on the verge of major transformation as result
of a technology of which Smith took little notice -- steam engine.

*** V. Enlightenment Calculation
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: v.-enlightenment-calculation
   :END:

review Raine's piece.

II. World of Steam

Few last notes about Smith:

-God's-eye perspective, not shopfloor perspective. cf. Marx

--machines he describes relatively simple contrivances. Not an engineer

-Providential view still "balance"

-Balance: in c. 18, natural and social philosophers were much enamored
of the figure of the balance. In Newtonian mechanics, motion of objects
understood to result from balance of forces, represented by the equals
sign. similarly, social systems seen as functioning through balance of
opposing forces. "invisible hand" was just such a balance (opposing
vices). cf. checks and balances of Amer. Const.

** The Enlightenment
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: the-enlightenment
  :END:

Dorinda Outram, /The Enlightenment/ (Cambridge, Cambridge UP, 199?)

*** O. Review and Introduction
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: o.-review-and-introduction
   :END:

Last week I talked about the general themes of the course, and in
particular introduced the thesis that the nineteenth century saw the
development of a distinct form of experience in that period -- an
experience of the world as flux, of history as progress, of science and
technology as the fundamental engines that drove the grand drama of
human development.

It may seem odd, therefore, that today's lectures, and this week's
readings, take us back into the depths of the Eighteenth century. The
first lecture will discuss the Enlightenment in general terms as an
intellectual movement /with political implications. / The second lecture
focusses on the work of Adam Smith as a particularly powerful example of
this; & we discuss its various effects on the moral and natural sciences
in the 18^{th} and 19^{th} centuries.

**** Legibility
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: legibility
    :END:

First, to complete what I was saying about legibility:

State reorders the world to render it /legible = /readable.

-massive expansion of state power underwritten by increase in
knowledge-gathering capacity. cf. Military draft c. 18 loose, freeform
conscriptio --> rigorous censuses, registries, well-0established
universal bureaucratic hierarchies, make possible deploymento fl argest
armies ever.

-bureaucracies grow, as do state-sponsored sc/tech endeavors.

cities.

forests

bees

** I The Enlightenment -- a brief history.
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: i-the-enlightenment-a-brief-history.
  :END:

**** Enlightenment
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: enlightenment
    :END:

In literature about the origins of “modernity”, the period called the
Enlightenment looms large. A number of important philosophers -- Max
Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno in their /Dialectic of Enlightenment/,
Jürgen Habermas in his /Structural Transformiton of the public Sphere/,
Michel Foucault in /The Order of Things/ -- take period from around 1700
to 1785 or so as /emblematic/ of modernity. The ideals of Enightenment
thinkers, they argued, were the ideals of an approaching modern world.
By analysing them, our contemporaries have hoped to discover something
about the structures that underly our own era.

Today's lecture will take us back to the 18^{th} century for a quick
historical review of the Enlightenment. We want to know:

-*What was the Enlightenment, *where did it take place, with wha names
was it associated?

-*Was there a coherent body of thought (unity) a*ssociated with the
Enlightenment?

-*What was the role of */*natural philosophy*/*, *or the study of the
natural world, in the Enlightenment?

-*how did Enlightenment thinkers understand the relation between reason
and the State?*

**** *What was the Enlightenment? *
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: what-was-the-enlightenment
    :END:

Writing in 1784, the Prussian philosopher Immanuel Kant thought he had
the answer: Enlightenment, he said, is “Man's release from his
self-incurred immaturity.” Enlightenment, for Kant, was simultaneously a
/historical/ process and an intellectual one. *Abstract* entity
“Enlightenment”, which it had always been possible to attain; but
“Enlightenment” was also a /process which human society in Europe was
purportedly undergoing at the very time of writing. /

So term “Enl” has always carried with it a sense of poth philosophical
and historical import. To be enlightened was to achieve insight, but
also to participate in a broader development in the history of human
societies. *Certain tension in confrontation of philosophical and
historical views. Is Enlightenment a period or a process?*

**** Unity of Enlightenment
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: unity-of-enlightenment
    :END:

We usually think of the Enlightenment as a period in intellectual and
cultural history stretching from the last days of the 17^{th} Century to
sometime near the end of the 18^{th} -- usually ending either shortly
before or shortly after the French Revolution. The most famous thinkers
of the Enlightenment lived in France, in the German-speaking lands east
of the French kingdom, and in the recently-annexed kingdom of Scotland
in the British Empire.

It was fashionable, until fairly recently, to speak of the Enlightenment
as a fairly coherent body of thought which united the most important
thinkers of this era -- Gottriefd Wilhelm Leibniz, Immanuel Kant, Denis
Diderot, Voltaire, Jean-Jacques Rousseau,, Adam Smith, John Locke --
around a small number of themes. All of these writers, whatevertheir
differences, believed in the emancipatory powecr of rReason to guide
human affairs, and understood their philosophy as a quest after tools
that might enable the eventual bettecrment of the human condition.
Intellectual historians like Peter Gay accepted Immanuel Kant's
definition of Enlightenment: “man's release from his self-incurred
immaturity,” whether the Enlightenment was Scottish, French, or German.

This view of the enlightenment as a /unity/ is less popular today than
it was 10 or 20 years ago, as more careful analysis of both the
/content/ of Enlightenment thought, and the /ontext/ in which it was
produced, has revealed substantial divergences within the canon of
“enlightened” thinkers. How does one reconcile, for instance, Rousseau's
rejection of human cultivation, his valorization of the “state of
Nature”, with Concorcet's eloquently-stated faith in unfailing human
progress? Insdtead of seeing Enl. As a unitary phenomenon, might be more
useful to see it as a period in which (1) certain material conditions
obtained, creating the conditions of possibility of a lively,
internaitonal, widespread intellectual conversation (more on this next
week); and (2) a time when a wide range of writers focussed their
attention on a few key issues. ThFor sake of simplicity, might say that
Enlightenment philosophy was above all ocncerned with delineating the
/role of reason in the ocnduct of h uman affairs. /

**** The Role of reason
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: the-role-of-reason
    :END:

Reason was the capacity to coldly grasp a problem and objectively
consider it, andthus achieve an understanding of that problem's
solutions that /all/ rational beings would accept. Reason was one road
to /univerality/ of conclusions, as had long been believed in, e.g.
Medieval theology or mathematics.

But there had always been other roads to Truth /besides/ Reason. In
particular, of course, /Faith/ . But picture is also a bit more complex
than that, e.g., history of /wonder/. Wonder -- shock of confrontation
with unknown -- was, in e.g. The 17^{th} century, understood as an
important means of attaining knowledge. Scientist Robert Boyle, for
instance, described his /wonderment -- his amazement -- at lurid
phenomena as a / n /enticement/ to learn more about them. Knowledge
depended on /engagement/, not just /abstraction/, and for that reason
wonder was important. Therefore natural philosophers sought out “marvels
of nature” -- phenomena that seemed to stretch the limits of the
possible, e.g. Glowing meat, monstrous births, portentous objects -- as
key to understanding Nature as a whole. The /exceptional/ as the key to
the /rule/.

For most of the philosophers associated with the “Enlightenment,” this
sense of wonder was interpreted as a problem. e.g, Adam Smith, who spoke
of natural philosophic inquiry as the process of /banishing/ the awkward
and unpleasant sense of wonder, and /replacing / it with certainty. (cf.
Daston and Park on passion of inquiry).

Study of “marvels,” then, became increasingly unimportant for
Enlightenment natural philosphers -- key was to discover the /rules
which governed the ordinary courseo f events/, not to be distracted by
the exception. Over-enthusiastic embrace of extraordinary was suspect
and, increasingly, vulgar.

Enthusiasm, superstition, imagination. These are dangerous sentiments,
sentiments of the unwashed masses uncleansed by the light of philosophy.

e.g., John Spencer on “prodigy-mongers: (Daston/Parks 335)

How mean a regard shall the issues of the severest debates, and the
commands of Authority find, if every pitiful Prodigy-monger have credit
enough with the People to blast them, by ftelling them that heaven
frowns upon the laws, and that God writes his displeasure against them
in black and visible Characters when some sad accident befals the
complyers with them?

This criticism of /imagination/ and /enthusiasm/ took all kinds of
targets. e.g. The /virtuoso/:

cf. Outram, p.47.

Most famous, of course, were the diatribes against /enthusiastic
religiosity/. In fact for much of the 20^{th} century, “Enlightenment”
portrayed as /anti-religious/ or /anti-christian/ movement. Certainly
some of the most important French /philosophes/ -- the Enlightenment
thinkers -- advocated atheism and agnosticism. Baron d'Holbach, Swiss
financier and dogged materialist, attacked organized rligion of all
kinds; Julien Offroy de La Mettrie (1709-1751), author of /L'Homme
Machine/, who denied the reality of the soul. Voltaire in his 1765
/Questions sur les miracles/ questioned whether miracles had taken place
as often as they were alleged to in the Bible; David Hume doubted the
plausibility of any account of miracles. These and other authors also
wondered whether the Bible could be counted on as a reliable source of
informaiton.

But more often, the so-called “anti-religious” thinkers of Enlightenment
were more precisely /anti-superstition/. They fattacked religious
practices they saw as irrational, destructive, contrary to demonstrable
fact. Voltaire, in /Candide/, satirizes the superstiion of the Catholic
sailors on the ship carriying Candide to America, but he does not deny
the existence of God; in fact, in response to Holbach's /Systeme de la
Nature /in 1770, Voltaire declared that belief in the existence of God
was /the most reaonable ocnclusion/.

Similarly, One of the earliest works of the Enlightenment is John
Locke's /The Reaonableness of Christianity/; one of the latest is kant's
/Religion within the limits of Reason Alone. /Both were attempts to
demonstrate that Christian religiosity could, in fact, be grounded
solely on reason. (not thatthis is wholly new...).

Still, even the most imporatn /advocates/ of Reason could be guardedi n
their faith. e.g. Kant in /Was ist Auifklaerung/, stating /public/ use
of reason should by free, but not /private/ use of reason. And Rousseau
as constant exception.

***** Ideology of reason and Reasonableness...
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: ideology-of-reason-and-reasonableness...
     :END:

Just b/c they bleived in an ideology of reason doesn't mean Enlightened
thinkers were always reasonable by our standards. cf., e.g, exoticism,
treatment of “others” as ahistorical; compare with colonialist
arguments. That is, not always most perceptive critics of themselves.

***** Natural Sciences
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: natural-sciences
     :END:

no such thing as “science” in this era (term coined in 1830's). instead
“nat phil,” carried on in conjunction with other parts of philosophical
inquiry.

-institutions of science: much, much, much weaker than they are today.
No professionals. Nonetheless:

-scientific societies, e.g. Royal Society, various Royal Academies of
Science. Networks of letter-writing (“republic of letters”) . Early days
of a newly-expanded print culture.

-substantial concern with matters of natural-philosophical import.

-Newtonian universe. /Vis viva/ debate. Cause of inertia, gravitation.

-state of the earth. Fixity of species, earth's crust, longevity of
time.

**** Reason of State
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: reason-of-state
    :END:

cf foucault on “governmentality”

What is relation betwn knowledge, reason, and state?

-enlightened despotism. Joseph II of Austiria, Frederick II of Prussia.

-Physiocratie. Anne-Robert Turgot (1727-81) [encyclopediste; Finance
Minister 1774-76. supports free market for wheat, leads to /Guerre des
Farines, 1775/), Quesnay (1694-1774) [surgeon to Louis XV; cf. Droit
Naturel, 1765. .

-in centural Europe: Cameralism: science of adminstration. Importance of
wealth. Virtues of strong government. /Social regulation!!!/ as part of
state objectives (not just /dynastic aspirations./ *Government as a
machine for production of desired ends*.

-Monarchical legitimacy as rooted in natural law (that is, monarch
PROVIDES FOR /NATURAL/ NEEDS, IS THEREFORE LEGIT).

-ALSO BOTH NATURE NAD ECONOMY OPEN TO 'MANAGEMENT' AND EXPLOITATION TO
MEET NEEDS OF THE STATE.

-role of monarch: *first bureaucrat*.

2. ** Gathering Knowledge: the Encyclopedia
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: gathering-knowledge-the-encyclopedia
      :END:

   Diderot, denis (1713-84) [from provincial family of artisans and
   work-shop owners; took minor orders 1726; rejects personal God, sees
   dnature and matter as full of energies, ocnstantly in transformation.
   Also preaches secular morality, starazes prejudices against adultery,
   sexual repression.

   , Jean le Rond dit D'Alembert (1717-83) [illegitimate son of salon
   hostess Claudine de Tensin, famous mathematician. Slaon frequenter.
   Wrote ca. 1400 articles for the Encyclopedie]

   , attempt to bring all knowledge under one heAD. WHAT'S THE POINT OF
   THIS ENTERPRISE? To unify knowledge is a /utopian impulse with a
   /socially imporoving/ goal. /

   Notes from “D'alembert: Science and Enlightenment, by Hankins.

   -huge financial endeavor (4 mil frnacs), 2.5 mill profit for pubs.
   Huge investment for encyclopedistes/.

1745: Diderot & D'Alembert hired to translate Cyclopedia (Ephraim
Chambers, 1728).

D'alembert stays till 1758\ (7^{th} vol):

attack by gov't: “The rights [of society, religion, and the state] have
been violated, their laws disregarded. Impeity walks with head held
high...humanity shudders, the citizenry is alrmed. Can one conceal from
oneself that there is a project formed, fa Society organized, to
propagate materialismn, to destroy Religion, to inspire a spirit of
independence, and to nourish the corruption of morals?

*** III. Concorcet: Progress...
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: iii.-concorcet-progress...
   :END:

Marie Jean Antoine Nicoleas de Caritat Condorcet (1743-94)

-mathematician whom we will encounter later when we talk about
probability. Invented voting method. Attempts to develop a social
mathematics and social physics. Girondin in the French Revolution,
fwrites a constitution, which is rejected; opposess execution of the
King, hides, attempts to escape, dies in prison.

Vision: of prefec ability of man.

p. 3 : time will come when sun shines only on free men...

7: progressive improvement of sciences and arts.

9: semiotic improvement.

11: power of education.


** old enlightenment-romanticism lecture
:PROPERTIES:
:EXPORT_FILE_NAME: old-enlightenment
:END:

Week 3: Enlightenment Sociability and

Romantic Science

His 324

The “Public Sphere” in the Enlightenment

One theme not explored last time which shouldn;'t be overlooked is
relationship btwn /Enlightenmen/ and /Development of a Public Sphere/ in
18^{th} century. Huge literature on this topic in 2^{nd} half of c. 20
is largely excited by J. Habermas, /The Structural Transformation of the
Public Sphere (1962)/.

H. argues that c. 18 saw major changes in way that /publicity /was
conceived. Raises a number ofi nterlocked questions which bear on our
inquiry:

-What did people in different eras mean when they spoke of “the public”,
“the public sphere” , and “public opinion”?

-How does scope of “private life” change over time? What are the
historical conditions under which “rights to privacy”, e.g., arise?

-How is the changing relationship between public and private, & the
changing definiton of the public sphere, related to the interloked set
of phenomna we're calling “modernity?”

-and finally, though this is not exactly a question for us, /what is the
legitimate/ (or to use H.'s term, /authentic/) scope of the public
sphere, and how does an /authentic/ public sphere get created or
dismantled

Take a couple of examples from famous philosophers:

Words “public” and “private” are latin in origin, and in late middle
ages/very beginning of “early modern” period, “public” events were those
in fwhich the lord /presented/ or /represented/ himself to the people.
“Public persons” were identified as such by particular insignia, etc...

-in middle ages, /private/ not opposed to public. No sense of an
opposition btwn /sphere of personal autonomy/ and /sphere of public
scrutiny/.

-Reformation changes this by making Religion “personal” rather than part
of public & political order.

-at the same time, have a quasi-separate distinc6tion btwn “private”
persons and “public” persons. Nobility are public, bourgeois are
private.

-in c. 18, this all changes in a complex way for reasons that have
partly to do with rise of absolutism & birth ofm odern State, partly
with technologies of printing and modes of communication. Skip to this
point.

c. 18 public sphere: media of communication

18^{th} century sees dramatic change in ways that people communicate
with each other. Some examples:

-mail services: much-broadened use of mails. Instead of private
couriers, increasing use of organized postal services, many of which are
state-administered. Means regular contact among people who likely have
never met. Sociability and sense of community.

-e.g. Societies of natural history

-emergence of a press selling books & broadsides. Increasing literacy
rates, decreasing prices of books made reading a very different activity
from what it had been before.

-also maybe a “reading revolution”: extensive not intensive reading.

-existeance of official lending libraries.

-emergence, then, of a “reading public” and a “republic of letters”

-cf. Outram, p. 21: “1780, on “Republic of Leters”:

In the midst of all the governments that dcecide the fate of men; in the
bosom of so many states, the majority of them despotic... there exists a
certain realm which holds sway only over the mind ... that we honour
with the name Republic, because it preserves a measure of independence,
and beause it is almost its essence to be free. It is the realm of
talent and of thought...”

-existence of a paying “public” allows existence of /professional/
writers & also fartists -- freedom from patronage. “Grub Street” --
writers who earned meagre living from sales of often virulent pamphelets
and articles.

-new institutions for public discourse in urbanizing Europe. . Secret
societies like Freemasonry. Also literary societies, the naturalists'
societies mentioned above.

-and finally, coffee houses. Importance of drugs!

Civil society vs. state authority: from opposition to interdependence.

(cf Habermas 17ff.)

in c. 18, increasing /autonomy /of State from individual persons (er.g.
Sep. of Prince's fortunes from the holdings of the State). Public
authority becomes /abstract and /durable/: /permanent /administration
and standing army/ (18).

Civil society arises as /all that is not *strictly private*/*, */but is
*excluded* from sphere of public authority. Economics, which earlier had
been/strictly private*, becomes *public* *in this limited sense.

(so riseo f “social sphere” is what allows for authentic public sphere
to arise; “...over whose regulation public opinion battled with public
power... the theme of the modern... public sphere shifted from the
properly political tasks of a citizenry acting in common (administration
of law as regards internnal affairs and military survival as regards
external affairs) to the more properly civic tasks of a society engaged
in critical public debate (the protection of a commercial economy).

 Publicity and the state. Secrets of state vs. publicity.

| Civil society (realm of commodity exchange and social labor) | Public sphere in the political realm                 | State (realm of the “police”) |
|                                                              | Public sphere in the world of letters (press, clubs) |                               |
| Conjugal family's internal space                             | (market of cultural products) “Town                  | Court (courtly-noble society  |

Political task of

Common criteria of /tischgesellschaften, salons/ and coffee houses:

1)social intercourse that disregards status altogether. Importance of
“common humanity”

2)tendency for realm of inquiry to increase. Commodification of
political positions.

3)whatever the material obstacles to inclusion on “the public”, it had
to be /in principle/ accessible to all.

Excursus: arts: cf. Establishment of public concert societies. Paid
admission to performances; rise of “taste” as opposed to function.
/Kunstrichter/ as form ofl ife.

Novels: subjectivity/interiority as oriented towards the public.

54-5: /opinion piblique/ of the phyusiocrats. Only public opntion has
insight into the /ordre naturel/ so that monrach should follow public
opnion...

-institutional existence of “civil sphere” & status-free realms -->
development of “universal” ruloes open to everyone; “objective rules”
also make space for interiority.



* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Frankenstein & Faust
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: lecture
  :END:

** I. Frankenstein
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: i.-frankenstein
   :END:

ch 3: Waldmann: The modern masters promice very little; they know that
metals cannot be transmuted and the at the elixir ofl ife is a chimera.
But these philosophers, whose hands seem only made to dabble in dirt,
and their eyes to pore over the microscope or crucible, have indeed
performed miracles. They penetrate into the recesses of nature and show
how she works in her hiding-places. They ascend into the heavens; they
have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of the air we
breathe. They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers; hey can
command the thunders of heaven. mimic the earthquake, and even mock thei
nvisible world with its own shadows.

ch 4: Whence, I often asked myself, did the principle of life
proceed.... I beheld the corruption of death succeed to the blooming
cheek of life; I saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and
brain. I paused, examining and analysing ll the minutiae of causation,
as exemplified in the change from life to d eath, and death to life,
until from the midst of this darkkness a sudden light broke in upon me
-- a light so brillian and wondrous, yet so simple, that while I became
dizzy with the immensity of the prospect which i illustrated, I was
urprised that among so many men of geniu s who had direced their
inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserve dto
discover so astonishing as ecret.

** Frankenstein
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: frankenstein
  :END:

Most famous work to deal with romantic vision of science, self-realization, is Shelley's /Frankenstein./ M. W. Shelley (1797-18519 was daughter of MW and William Godwin. 1814 (17 years old) elopes with Persy Bysshe Shelley, Romantic poet, elopes with him (despite his marriage). 2 years later, in Swiss Alps, Shelly, Mary, Byron have ghost-story writing contest. Novel finished shortlty thereafter. Aesthetically flawed work; by writer who never produced another novel to rival it; yet remains one ofm ost powerful stofies of our era, so brilliantly did it capture fundamental problems of our age.

-Novel follows Victor Frankenstein, Swiss bourgeois raised on texts of medeival alchemy who encounters newest galvanic researches while studying in Ingolstadt. Frankenstein learns the immense power of the new sciences (p.47 quote old vs new). Passion grips him, a passion which more than rivals his pale amorous attachment to his stepsister.

- weeks on end seeks secret of galvanic mystery which ties life to brute matter. And finds it. in moment of striking illumination while studying dead body -- “from the midst of this darkness a sudden light broke in upon me -- a light so brilliant nad wondrous, yet so simple, that while I became dizzy with the immensity of the prospect which it illustrated, I was surprised... that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret. ... I succeeded in discovering the cause of generation and life...” (51)
- -but his success creates a monstrous creature, of foul visage and proportions, that disgusts Frankenstein, and he rejects it.
- monster, then, proves itself to be a genius as well. Teaches self to read, write, speak, seeks companionship, but universally persecuted. after multiple attempts to seek happiness, turns to bitter hatred of creator, and the two become engaged in fatal struggle which claims lives of Frankenstein's most beloved, and finally that of Frankenstein himself.
- in conclusion of novel, when the monster confronts the sole surviving acquaintance of Frankenstein on the iced-over Arctic seas, monster recounts his transformation into a chreature of evil:
- No... I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery. No sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the love of virtue, the feelings of happiness and affection with which my whole being over flowed, that I wished to be participated. But now that virtue has become to me a shadow, and that happiness and affection are turned into bitter and loathing despair, in what should I seek for sympathy.? etc. (209)

- in contrast to vulgar movie versions of Frankenstein, Shelley's “modern prometheus” is a tragic hero in his own right, as much as Victor himself.

- so Shelley's relationship to modernity much more troubled than the image we usually get. often seen as premonition of e.g. tnt, poison gas, a-bomb, ozone layer -- genie let out of bottle, can't put it back. Suggests rejection of modern science in its entirety. But not only does F. take his most potent inspiration from the alchemists; also, not clear that the act of creation itself is the moment of his failure. Maybe it's the /failure to lofe/ that dooms him. And this fits with much of what we know about the romantics.

- here, then is conflict btwn romanticism & ideology of science that comes to reign in c. 19: engagement with Nature, insight into its essence, vs. distanced relationship (but nstill not fully decided). but also, unlike various strands of positivism, recognizes dangers/disadvantages of modernity

*** Faust

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749-1832) towering figure in literature in this period. in youth (1774) published /Leiden des jungen Werthers/ , leading light in /Sturm und Drang/. Wildly popular novel. His /Italian Journeys/ a romantic milestone and also sets tone for general veneraiton of Itwly in this period. But /Faust/ his greatest work. Published in two parts, 1808 and 1832, but Goethe worked on it most of his life. Reworking of Marlowe's /Dr. Faustus/, which itself reworked a hoary medeival legend. But Goethe's /Faust / is modern in a way that others simply aren't.

Play begins with Faust in his study, contemplating his midlife crisis. He is a great genius; has studied all 4 faculties (Philosophy, Law, Medicine, Theology) and is as knowledgeable as any, even in the occult arts of magic. despairing of the futility of life, he contemplates suicide, only to be held off by the sound of distant church bells. After a walk through town, devil appears to him.

- Goethe's /faust/ differentiated form others b/c Mephistopheles offers him, not /power/ or wealth (though those too), but above all, experience and communion with the world. grant me power, and I commit myself to an undending fascination with the world, but also to endless discontent:

#+begin_quote
Werd ich zum Augenblicke sagen:
Verweile doch! Du bist so schön!
Dann magst du mich in Fesseln schlagen,
Dann will ich gern zugrunde gehn!..
Wie ich beharre, bin ich Knecht,
Ob dein, was frag ich, oder wessen. (ca 1700)
#+end_quote

-Mehistopheles promises to unleash, not only the powers of hell, but of
modernity, for Faust.
#+begin_quote
Wenn ich schs Hengste zahlen kann,
Sind ihre Kräfte nicht die miene?
Ich renne zu und bin ein rechter Mann,
Als hätt ich vierundzwanzig Beine. (1824)
#+end_quote

- Mephistopheles then leads Faust out into the streets, out form his
study into the world.

- contrast btwn city and study is essential. simple study is
insufficient -- engagement is crucial.

- and so Faust goes out into world and falls in love with
Gretchen/Margarethe/Gretel. This love story is the most famous part of
/Faust/. outline of plot is simple: With aid of Meph, Faust seduces
Gretchen; she becomes pregnant with his child; her brother accuses her
of harlotry; Mephistopheles causes his death, but Gretchen is taken
away; Faust flees the scene, and Gretchen, despite an opportunity to
escape, resigns herself to prison and dies without sin, her soul carried
up to heaven by a chorus of angels.

- Gretchen dies a victim of clash btwn world of reedom and of tradition.

*** Part II
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: part-ii
   :END:

Part II is the story of Faust's redemption (would think he's unredeemable).

- after lots of nothing, F & M find themselves atop a mountaintop. F.
contemplates the sea. (102220 ff)

- F has a vision which goes beyond that of M. wants to harness the forces of nature for work (like an engine!!!!).

- to gain the opportunity to do so, Faust commits himself to aid the blind and tottering Emperor (holy roman) against a cynical, power-grabbing revolutionary insurgencce (French Revn has to be seen as background here).

- after decisvely winning the battle with mystical assistance, Faust throws himeslf into what Berman calls “work of development”. first “tragedy of development”

- using fair means and foul, Faust calls workers to him, on a scale never before seen.

They toil night and day: (11123) -- human sacrifice gives rise to mighty works.

... until all that stands in the way f the perfection of Faust's plan is the small farm of an elderly couple, Baucis and Philemon. (11157)

- after tormenting himself over this fact, Faust gets Meph to ‘take care of it' for him. 11240-275)

- though beset by worries, he casts himself into his work with a fierce will:

#+begin_quote
work! work!

Daß sich das gröste Werk vollende,
Genügt ein Geist für tausend Hände. (echoes Meph in act 1, also is the
great dream of technocratic division of labour)
#+end_quote

- despite his grief, Faust commits himself to the project, and looking
out on it, he is soothed.
#+begin_quote
verweile doch, du bist so schön!
#+end_quote


- dreams of happiness, but contentment only comes in striving.

- moral reckoning

- meph's warnings: the work will fail!

- but seeking good suffices. angels carry him up.

- faustian bargain doesn't end in disaster, but in tragedy which takes
whole world as its protagonist. social world suffers for what it
undertakes. but striving is good.

- so, embraces modernity, for all its manifold problems. And embraces
modern, technological, insturmental rationality, as one aim among
others.

- but does /not/ ignore the cost.

* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): The Utopian Impulse

Term "Utopian" has been a special kind of disparagement at least since Marx and Engels' "Manifesto of the Communist Party" (1848), in which they derided their competition as "merely" Utopian thinkers, in opposition to their own "scientific" critique of contemporary society. 

So there's a way of understanding Utopianism that sees it as fundamentally /unscientific/ or /pseudoscientific/. That's not really how I use the term here and in the course. Instead, I have been suggesting that "Utopianism" is, as it were, an argument about what possibilities arise when /new technological conditions make possible new social conditions/, when those conditions /are ordered by reason and science/.  

We should identify at least two roots here:

- first, of course, is the word /Utopia/ itself, the title of Thomas More's 1516 polemic tract. Pun on Greek words, ambiguity.
- second is the belief in revolutionary possibility: in the capacity for dramatic social transformation, which became dramatically more widespread in the early c. 19 than it ever before had been in Europe.
  - this is rooted in the kinds of scinetific & especially technical change we have already been talking about (and nex tweek we will finally discuss the steam engine in moredepth).  

So, might be better to think of utopianism as a condition of being -- a `lebensform`, an attitude or precondition that stretches across multiple domains of activities.

- to be "Utopian" is,variously, to be "impractical", to have "unbounded ambition", to /believe in futurity/ and in /possibility/; a kind of naivete; a kind of optimism; a kind of arrogance.

- Some 

  We'll leave aside the specifics today, though we may have an opportunity to talk more about Marx later on.

Henri Comte de Saint­Simon (1760­1825)
followers revived his teachings, set up a kind of quasi­religion.
included mostly engineers, industrialists, including many of
most important technologists of late c.19 france.
Charles Fourier (1772­1837)
Robert Owen (1771­1858)
Etienne Cabet (1788­1856)
Pierre Joseph Proudhon (1809­1865)
Peter Kropotkin (1842­1921)

** Sources:
- on Cabet, entry in Merriman, /Encyclopedia of Europe 1789-1914, v. 4/;
- on Utopianism, [[zotero://select/items/1_5SWBMNX7][PADEN, ROGER. “Marx’s Critique of the Utopian Socialists.” Utopian Studies 13, no. 2 (2002): 67–91. http://www.jstor.org/stable/20718467.]]
- 

* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Engines of Progress
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: engines-of-progress
  :END:

q: what separates B's diff engine from the mere automata of the age?

** Balance vs. Engine
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: balance-vs.-engine
   :END:

***  in c. 18, natural and social philosophers were much enamored of the
figure of the balance.
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: in-c.-18-natural-and-social-philosophers-were-much-enamored-of-the-figure-of-the-balance.
    :END:

In Newtonian mechanics, motion of objects understood to result from
balance of forces, represented by the equals sign. similarly, social
systems seen as functioning through balance of opposing forces.
"invisible hand" was just such a balance (opposing vices). cf. checks
and balances of Amer. Const., or “adverserial” relationship btwn

-in c. 19, model of society as "balanced" largely replaced in social
theory by image of /engine/. Smith's work would be reinterpreted by his
successors in light of a new vision of the universe, based on a dynamic
rather than static vision of natural processes. (social staticks 
social dynamics).

-Dev't of technology of /steam engine/ in c. 18 was crucial historical
development in this major shift in the understanding of human society.
steam engine not only massively transformed experience of daily life
everyone in c. 19 Britain; also played important role in development of
new science of thermodynamics and, just as importantly, captured c. 19
imagination like no other feature of that world.

So today:

*** discuss the technological development of steam engines
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: discuss-the-technological-development-of-steam-engines
    :END:

(always fuck this up, so sorry in advance)

***  take a ride on the railroad journey w/ Wolfgang Schivelbusch
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: take-a-ride-on-the-railroad-journey-w-wolfgang-schivelbusch
    :END:

** Newcomen and Watt
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: newcomen-and-watt
   :END:

James Watt 1736-1819 born to lower middle class, mechanical Scottish
family. Myths grew up of Watt's childhood fascination with machines;
"discovered power of steam while watching lid of boiling kettle". This
is apocryphal; we do know, though, that James Watt was born into a
maritime culture which stressed useful mathematics (for navigation and
surveying) and an austere Scottish Presbyterianism which frowned upon
'wasteful' and idle pursuits (Smith, /Science of Energy/, 33). At the
age of 19 he undertook an apprenticeship as an instrument-maker in
London, and by the early 1760's was engaged as an instrument-maker at
Glasgow University, where he played an essential role in the
natural-scientific pursuits of the small but vital community of chemists
and physicists at Glasgow. Adam Smith, though no longer at Glasgow by
this time, numbered among Watt's patrons.

in 1763-4, Prof. John Anderson's natural philosophy class, Watt called
upon to repair the small 'Newcomen engine' used for demonstration
purposes.

Newcomen engine:

Newcomen engine was an ingenious device used to pump water out of coal
mines, enabling erection of deep coal mines prviously impossible. First
engines built in early 1700's (image) steam fed into cylinder, then
condensed by jet of cold watter, creating vacuum which pulled piston
back into shaft (gearheads: this is inverse of modern internal
combustion engine).

-by our standards hideously inefficient. Needed so much coal only
practical use was at coal mines! Mostly used to pump water.

While repairing engine, Watt notices various technical problems and gets
interested in efficiency of engines (like all Presbyterians, abhors
'waste'). Observes a serious problem with engine: each cycle /heats/ and
/recools/ cylinder. this b/c max /power/ demands cylinder rapidly cooled
once per cycle (otherwise vacuum is weak). But max /economy / demands
cylinder kept hot (else need too much coal). How to fix this?

-Watt: introduce sep. cooling chamber. shunt steam into (permanently
cold) cooling chamber, pull lever down; then close passage to chamber,
reopen cylinder, pump in air, pull down piston.

-also increase max power by adding steam pressure to downstroke.

-scientific consequences: first obvious instance of "heat" engine,
demonstrating that heat can be converted into mechanical energy. get to
that later.

-technical consequences: Watt engine far more efficient, and gets
increasingly so over c. 18 and into c. 19. also uses high-pressure
steam, not "atmospheric" pressure steam like Newcomen  power virtually
unlimited. Can be used for almost anything! immensely powerful.

1769: Watt takes out first patent, builds full-scale engine with backing
of John Roebuck. Roebuck bankrupt 1773;

1775: Watt and Matthew Boulton partnership based in Birmingham.

1776, when Smith publishes WN, Watt makes first 2 big engines, one for
coal mine, but second for iron works. face competition at first, but
establish effective monopoly by establishment of 'service package'

In this extremely competitive market, Watt develops methods for gauging
the power of the engine, including coining term "horsepower" (33000 lb
raised 1 ft in 1 minute);

 by 1800, almost 500 engines sold. This number continues to increase
exponentially for much of c. 19.

-numerous technical improvements -- of which most important is
'governor', which becomes important later on and of which we may or may
not have occasion to speak in future.

Consequences

steam engines unleashed almost limitless productive capacity with
extreme rapidity. Ingenious mechanisms allowed steam power to be applied
to all kinds of work -- (demonstrating basic similarity underlying all
labour). -- and so was most visible of the many factors revolutionizing
production in early c. 19. iron works, "statanic mills", railroads --
all the great hallmarks of c. 19 industry depended vitally on steam
engines and coal power.

Mediating Machine

Not surprising, then, that image impressed itself on all kinds of
observers of society and entered into thinking of social and natural
scientists. What was 'engine' of society? "Balance" could no longer be
taken for granted. Clearly, "harmony" was not root of progress, but
catastrophic, vital power of engines. corresponding change from 'static'
model of Smith and others to /dynamical/ model. Understand engine here
as something stronger than an analogy. Became a kind of currency, used
to translate btwn two different realms (natural and social). The analogy
was not mere rhetric, as e.g. when my geek friends complain about “not
having enough cycles” to do something. Instead, structures the social
thinking in a systematic way.

highlight this: no more checks and balances among progressives.

-Progress, already fundamental to Adam Smith's account of economy,
becomes enshrined in every version of pol economy to arise in early c.
19. But whereas Smith sees harmony and equality, others see conflict and
hierarchy. Among most prominent of these was Charles Babbage
(1791-1871). Babbage is famous today as "inventor of the computer", but
much better known to his contemporaries as an indefatigable propagandist
for scientific pursuits. Cofounder of BAAS, interested equally in /pol
econ/ and /math/. politically a 'radical', follower of James Mill and
Jeremy Bentham, free marketeer, believer in civil liberties; represented
left wing of British bourgeoisie (in sense of progressivist, not in
sense of socialist). In 1830's was best known as author of /Economy of
Machines and Manufactures/, a kind of taxonomy of machinery. In this
book, which is a bit of a yawner to the untrained mind but filled with
pretty fascinating stuff ,actually, Babbage distinguished strongly
between engines and mechanical entrainments. One supplies power; other
merely transmits it. similarly, in vision of society, division of labour
between person who /directs/ an enterprise, and person who /carries it
out/: division of head and hand. Note for Smith this division
non-existent, insofar as labourer's mind / sharpened by engagement in
single task. (even though Smith also admits that philosophy becomes
specialized activity, doesn't indicate that this is hierarchical)/.

(following from Wise, "Work and Waste II", p.412-415

-for Babbage, 'capital behaves like /engine power; /it sets skill and
labour in action in the way an engine sets machines in action.

-middlemen like /flywheel/: store surplus production and dispense it.

-/money/ is means for transmitting value through the economy,
funcitoning like neutral /mechanism for transmitting power. e.g. relates
workers to employers in the way 'unerring piece of mechanism' connects
power source to work. /

/-/friction/ should be avoided, e.g. taxes. /

-so whole economy is, in essence, a machine strictly analogous to a
precisely engineered factory with a /steam engine/ at its heart.

-note interesting fact: on one hand, /laissez-faire/, on other, strictly
planned for optimization. essential tension dominates economics to the
present.

- at even broader level, Babbage argued that /science/ is the engine of
society: in economy of knowledge, science is reservoir of force which
powers action and, in general, human progress, like capital powers the
economy.

-This just one of many examples, explored more thoroughly by NW in "Work
and Waste" and "mediating machines". Point want to convey here is that
steam engine not only changed production, changed way people understood
themselves and their society, and also natural world (more on that next
week). People tried tuo understand the social changes being wreaked by
th steam engine /as though the social system itself had the properties
of the steam engine. In so doing the y also reimagined the engine
itself. Want to stop for a moment here and tell a story in which
Babbage's work on the Difference Engine is understood as a
steam-inspired intervention into the great political struggle of his
day. /

Discussed how Smith thought that div'n of labour created creativity.
Wrote this the same year that the Steam Engine was being developed. SE
brought about new organization of labour, in which sep of hand and head
became increasingly inevitable. Vast profits of industrial capitalism
rested with a very small numbr. One argument for this was that the
worker invested only his labour power, while the industrialist wasi n
effect theguiding spirit behind the manufacturing process: “ein Geist,
[der] genuegt fuer tausend haende”. The heroic individual as productive
force.

The status of this agument was amjor gual around which e.g. the workers'
movementso f the early c. 19 revolved. So, e.g., when Andrew Ure invoked
the “Modern Promeheus” in his /Philoosphy of Manufacture/, he
appropriated the vision of the heroic creator and stripped it of its
moral ambiguities. For Ure (*give bio)* the steam engine was (cf.
Schaffer) “the Iron man spung out of the hands of our modern Prometheus
at the bidding of Minerva---a creation destined to restore order among
the industrious classes.” Ure though the steam engine imposed with an
absolute will a new order on society, and that that new order was better
for everyone who experienced it. Part of what the steam engine did was
to replace the intelligence of the worker with that of the
capitalist/designer. /* Mechanical production magnified boh the physical
(brute) labour of the workers, and the mental labour of the designer.
*/denial of the workers' mental input was n essantial political move
which sought to define th social reality of the day, a reality which was
threatened, in the 1830's by riots and the spectre of Chartism.

Babbag's diff engine, Schaffer argues, needs to be seen in this light,
as an intervention in the debate over the intelligence of machines in
the steam age. Automata were not themselves intelligent; they just hid
an intelligent agent in a costume (TURK). Smilarly, the intelligence of
the Diff engine was Babbage's -- he'd figured out the algorithm etc.
Whose intelligence was embodied in the machine? Babbage's .Whose
intelligencew ould bedistributed across Britain if his plan for a new
calculating order won out? Babbage's. The diff engine would leverage B's
creativity as the Steam Engine leveraged that of any other inventor -- &
in fact would do so by virtue of stteam power/, as his machine would be
rather bulky & necessitate automation. /

following stolen from /Babbage's intelligence/

"The engine, from its capability of performing by itself all those
purely material operations, spares intellectual labour, which may be
more profitably employed. Thus the engine may be considered as a real
manufactory of figures"

*L.F.Menabrea, 1842, translated by Ada Lovelace, 1843.
*[[http://www.hrc.wmin.ac.uk/theory-babbagesintelligence-foot.html#8][*[8]*]]*
*

Babbage's designs for intelligent machines dominated his career from the
moment he reached Regency London as an independently wealthy and
ambitious analyst. His Difference Engine was based on the principle that
the nth differences of successive values of n-power polynomials were
constants and thus tables of these values could be computed by the
addition and subtraction of a set of predetermined constants.

although it is not itself the being that reflects, it may yet be
considered as the being which executes the conceptions of intelligence.

Only the superior combination and correlation of each component
guaranteed efficient, economical, planned and therefore intelligent
performance. This general, abstract, lawlike behaviour was only visible
to the overseer, the manager, men such as Babbage.

 Also, of course, exerted practical effects on world of work, e.g. via
creation of new classes of workers, esp. women and children...

-Smith's defense of div'n of labour transformed, then, into quite
different vision. by time of Babbage. strictly hierarchical; less
intimately rooted in theory of human nature, instead completes process
of 'naturalization ' of human activity. Still comedic visin, but
narrower vision of human ends; more instrumental vision of human
workers; more obvious object of criticism forthose who saw modernity as
tragic.

III. Enlightenment Calculation

In last moments, let's try to bring together the first and last bits of
this week'sl ectures by discussiong Daston#s piece. Daston elegantly
traces history of Smith's pin example from 1776 to the 1840's. Asks
somewhat different question from one we've been discussing: what place
did /calculation/ have in the maps of human capacities made in c. 18 and
c. 19? form /intelligence/ to /mechanism/. Oddly enough, Smith has
crucial role here in pin analogy. Incorporated into Encyc. Read by
Prony, great French mathemeatician.

Prony: cadastral tables: farm out grunt labour. Hierarchical div'n of
labour allows monumental calculations impossible without div'n of
labour. But calc. itself no longer nec. a mathematical activity.

Babbage: can replace these humans by machines. fully complete
dehumanization through calculation by steam.

* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Railway Journey [MISSING!!!!]
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: railway-journey
  :END:


* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): LECTURE 4: THERMODYNAMICS
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: lecture-4-thermodynamics
  :END:

** 1.- introduction to ideas, Carnot to Kelvin

Earlier in the course, we talked about the introduction of the steam
engine as a “guiding metaphor” which replaced the /balance/ as the
primary image in discussions of social and natural order. Today I want
to elaborate on that claim somewhat, by examining in greater detail the
rise of the science of thermodynamics and its impact on scientific
culture and European culture more widely.

*** I. The Laplacean Universe.

In the 18^{th} century, Newtonian physics was reformulated in a much
more sophisticated way by Pierre-Simon Laplace. Using powerful
mathematical techniques derived from the Leibnizian calculus notation,
Laplace postulated a universe regulated by the actions of forces of
attraction and repulsion between objects located in different points of
space. The eternal motions of the heavens is the guide here; in his
/System of the World/, Laplace showed that, though planetary orbits did
exhibit perturbation, this was the result of periodic oscillations which
conserved the sum of planetary motion. That is, the solar system was a
/balanced /and self-perpetuating system, giving no signs of beginning or
end.

The geology of the early nineteenth century displayed a similar
constancy and regularity. “Nature,” said one geologist (Hutton)
‘produces seas and continents, not by /accident/, but by the operation
of /regular and uniform causes/... and gives /stability to the whole/,
not by perpetuating individuals, but by reproducing them in succession.”
The history of the earth displays “no mark either of a beginning or an
end”. And similarly, the writings of political economy, even Malthus's,
as Elise pointed out, were in this early period centrally concerned with
/balance/. (Quetelet,”Social Statics”)

Moreover, the universe presupposed by most of these theories was
/Newtonian/ or, more precisely, /Laplacean/, in that it (first of all)
was willing to account for all deviation from expected values in terms
of balanced periodic oscillations; and second, insofar as it took the
/inverse-square law/ as the fundamental model of a natural law:
absolutely simple, precise, /constant and continuous/. (Wise, WW, 287)
“Continuous forces neither create nor destroy motion by their action.
Rather they convert motion into or out of a latent form, so that the
periodic oscillations of the planets are oscillations between actual
/vis viva/ and potential /vis viva/”.

/vis viva/ (mv2) was an old concept, introduced by Leibniz as a
conservation principle exclusively for motion and force. Controversy in
c. 18 over use of mv or mv2 as proper measure of force (now seen as two
sep. conservation principles).

In c. 19, /vis viva / (which had been largely out of fashion) will
return with a vengeance to overthrow the stately Laplacean world, with
its elegant balances and point-to-point relationships, with an energetic
universe which is /constantly flowing downhill. /

*** II. The Problem of Heat

For the Laplacean worldview, heat was a notoriously recalcitrant
problem. Arising at the interface of chemistry and physics, and in the
analysis of messy problems like that of /friction/, heat seemed an
extremely unlikely candidate for the development of a law based on
attraction and repulsion.

In fact, it was extremely difficult even to characterize what heat
/was/. The dominant theory into the early 19^{th} century was that heat
was a fluid, called ‘caloric'. Like water, the fluid caloric tended to
run ‘downstream' -- from warmer bodies into cooler. Under the caloric
theory, all heat was either active or latent, so the heat produced by
(say) friction was the result of a mechanical expansion of the ineffable
caloric fluid. Through a remarkable series of theoretical innovations,
the theory of caloric would be replaced by the /dynamic/ theory of heat,
which understand heat as the insensible, internal motions of the tiniest
parts of physicl bodies, motion which can be converted into mechanical
work thorugh the mediation of a “heat engine”.

As is perhaps obvious, the great motivating force here is the /steam
engine/. Let's review how the steam engine works: contraction of steam
causes cooling, bringing the piston down; new steam is brought into the
piston as it rises. In a mysterious way, work has bee performed,
apparently solely by virtue of the power of heat. How will this be
explained?

First important step we need to describe is work of Sadi Carnot, son of
Lazare, an important physicist and military engineer in Revolutionary
France. S. b. 1796, and after studying physics and economics, published
/Reflexions sur la pussance motrice de feu. (1824)/

Here Carnot, who continued to believe in the caloric theory, nonetheless
proclaimed the centrality of heat to the cosmic order. “Heat is the
cause of all the motions, the kinetic phenomena, on the earth. It causes
the winds and all atmospheric turbulences, the formation of clauds at
different altitudes, rainfall and other forms of precipitation as well
as the great oceanic currents and... earthquates and volcaones.”
Moreover, he remarks, the “heat-engine”, is resoponsible for al lthe
great transformations of the age, proclaiming that ‘the steam engine is
now more important for England's existence than is her Navy'

Then goes on to say: interesting fact is, that despite this obvious
central importance of heat, there has up to now been no general theory
of the heat-engine, applicable to all forms of heat-engine. And here's
his manifesto:

Machines which are not driven by heat, those which are driven by the
power of men or animals... can be analysed down to their last details by
mechanical theory. Every event is predictable, all possible movements
are in accordance with established general principles... A similar
theory is obviously required for heat engines.

So the Laplacean universe has to be supplemented with a universe of
heat. Or, more precisely, extend Laplacean theory to the motions of
caloric.

2 principles: to use heat to generate power, need cold AND hot bodies.
“fall of caloric” is absolutely essential. (water-power analogy)

2 -- efficiency demands that /useless / flow of heat by minimized. Asks
question: “can we set a limit to the improvement of the heat engine, a
limit which, by the very nature of things, cannot in any way be
surpassed? Or conversely, is it possible for the process of improvement
ot go on indefinitely_”

bases answer to this question on observation ‘the production of motion
in the steam engine always occurs when the equlibnrium of caloric is
restored, or... when caloric passes from a body at one temperature to
another body at a lower temperature. equilibrium = balance.

In fact, dexcribes ‘perfect' heat-engine where no heat is lost from the
expanding substance except that which is expended on productive work.

 Steam-engine is repalced by ‘heat engine' -- steam-engine becomes part
of the natural order.

-this ideal heat engine /must/ be the most efficient possible. (connect
two engines, one forward, one backwards; if one is more efficient, it
runs the latter and generates work out of /no / net fall of heat.

Carnot's work is left largely untouched until reworked in 1834 by Emil
Clapeyron, Ecole Polytech. engineer, who represents Carnot's cycle in
terms of the “indicator diagram” of James Watt. This helped translate it
into terms familiar to British engineers. Also raised the graphic
diagram of an engines funciton ot a principle of nature. Again: steam
engine as “mediating machine” structuring vision of world.

Carnot and Clapeyron both believed in the existence and conservation of
caloric. In technical ways that I don't want to get into right now, this
radically distinguished their work from the North British tradition, to
which we now turn. James Prescott Joule (1818-1889) was the son of a
prosperous brewer. Beer brewing was an important businesss which
depended centrally on very fine temperature measurements at crucial
stages in the brewing operation. In 1841 he showed, using careful
temperature measurements, that the heat that is generated when an
electric current passes through a body was NOT transferred from another
part of the circuit, but is actually /generated/. He suggests therein”

if we consider heat not as a /substance, but as a / state of vibration/,
there appears to be no reason why it should not be induced by an action
of a simply mechanical character, such, for instance, as is presented in
the revolution of a coil of wire befre the poles of a permanent
magnet.”/

 The implication here is that HEAT itself is not conserved, but can be
created. So the caloric theory doesn't seem to hold. Following these
experiments, Joule undertook a number of experiments in an effort to
measure the /mechanical value/ of heat. Most important set of
experiments involved churning water with paddles. How much work is
required to heat the water a given amount? (workers raise weights, which
then fall, churning water). labour=work=heat. Word ‘value' not
accidental. Interested in practical application in this industrial city.

Joule's intellectual significance: heat is not a sep substance, but can
be converted into mechanical force (work). In fact, has particular
mechanical equivalent (733ft-lb= 1degree F/lb water). Still question as
to how the substance are related on a physical level.

William Thomson placed Joule's findings in the context of Carnot's work
on heat engines to phrase, famously, the first and second laws of
thermodynamics.

In light of Joule's claims about the mechanical value of heat, Kelvin
rewrote carnot in his ‘relexions on...'(1849). poses 2 questions:

-what is the precise nature of the thermal agency by means of which
/mechanical effect/ is to be produced, without effects of other kinds?

-How may the amount of this thermal agency necessary for performing a
given quantity of work be estimated?

‘we perceive that a certain quantity of heat is /let down/ from a hot
body, the metal of the boiler, to another body at a lower temperature,
the metal of the condenser” and that there results from this
transference of heat a certain development of mechanical effect....
(therefore) ... the thermal agency by which mech. effect may be
obtained, is the transference of heat from one body to another at lower
temperature.

 but here's where he differs from Carnot and Joule:

“when thermal agency is thus spent in conducting heat through a solid,
what becomes of the mechanical effect which it might produce? nothing
can be lost in the operations of nature -- no energy can be destroyed.
Whate effect is then produced in place of the mechanical effect which is
lost. A perfect theory of heat demads and answer to this question....

Answer to this question was difficult to find, but crucial. To
understand it, want to step back bit and review Smith's argumwents in
the readings we did this week, also fill in some gaps.

*** III. North British Science of Energy

William Thomson, probably the best-known of the group of engineeres and
scientists who crafted the science of thermodynamics at mid-century, Was
born and raised in Glasgow. His father, James Thomson (brother has same
name), had started off as a farm laborer before attending university in
Glasgow, going on to become a schoolteacher and finally prof. of
engineering at Glasgow Unviersity itself. Glasgow was one of the two
seats of the Scottish Enlightenment, as we've heard before, but differed
from Edinburgh in the extent of its contact with the industrial cities
of Northern England. The population increased 3-fold from 1800 to 1840,
, especially as aresult of heavy industry -- an induustrey which
revolved around steam engine manufacture, railways, and iron
shipbuilding.

The earliest letter we have from William, written to his sister Ana,
states “we have not begun the steam-engine, for papa was not wanting us
to do it.” the ‘we' are William and his brother James. James was
passionately interested in practical engineering, while William was,
from early on, recognized as a remarkable mathematicla talent. As they
grw older, they were rapidly integrated into the extraordinary community
of scientists, engineers, and industrialists that was at the heart of
the new Glasgow. This was the very city in which Watt had first invented
his steam-engine, and even before the Thomson brothers came of age there
was an extraodrinary group assembled there.

William Cambridge-educated: Anglican unvsersity whose primary fdpurposee
ixzsstill to produce men of the ministry (in principle). Studies under
Tory Whewell, philosopher of science who is well aware of
interpenetration of theological and natural-philosophical questions.

At just this period, though, Scotland was undergoing a major convulsion.
In England of this period, the industrializing North was seperrated from
the centers of academic learning by a great geographical distance. In
Scotland this was not so -- the great universities and the great
industrial towns were the same, espeically in Glasgow. The Chartist
movement was growing, as the gap between rich and poor continued to
increase; and within the Established Church of Scotland, was in the
midst of turmoil. In 1843, the reverend Thomas Chalmers led his
supporters out of the establishced church and found ed the ‘free church'
of scotland. This evangelical movement, and the crisis it provoked, was
to play a crucial role in William Thomson's cosmological development and
the development of his theories of energy and entropy.

We might see Thomas Chalmers's theology as a sort of Romantic reation to
the Laplacean, enlightenment complacency with the order of things. The
dominant, so-called ‘moderate' stream of Scottish theology preached an
elitist vision of hierarchical harmony, consistent with a Laplacean
vision of the cosmos. The Laplacean vision, with its deistic
implications, was, however, unpalatable to Chalmers. The idea that the
universe might be set in motion once by god, and then not require his
presence ever again, seemed implausible. In fact, he argued, the
beautifully designed dispostions of nature were not eternal_ ‘there is
an utter derangement into which nature has been thrown -- so that all
her elements are impregnated with disease. In fact, within creation,
there was aan unmistakeable ‘principle of destruction' at work. The
universe was cursed by depravity, imperfect in its parts and destined
for inevitable decay. GOD alone was eternal.

The role of man was to seek to combat these forces of decay through
work, prudence, and economy. Like other Scots, Chalmers preached the
fundamental virtue of useful work, and the /vicious/ nature of waste and
idleness.

At first the University of Glasgow rejected the doctrines of Chalmers'
Free Church, and their evangelical message of a Universe of progressive
decay. But increasingly the university saw the necessity ofm aking
concessions to the new theology, and so they did, in an effort to bridge
the gap between a conservative orthodoxy and an increasingly
unpredictable reform movement. After Chalmers' death the Free Church
became increasingly fundamentalist and carried out various purges. In
the end, Chalmers' views remained as a sort of moderate response to
conservatism, which embraced the values of work, and viciousness ofw
aste, and the essential role of man in staving off the progressive decay
of the universe.

Smith argues that this sense of the universe: “everything in the world
is progressive. The material world o cud not come back to any previous
state without a violation of the laws which have been manifested o man,
that is, without a creative act or an act possessing similar power.” --
serves as an intellectual /resource/ to hompson when when he goes to
formulate his physical theories, and also as a theological
presupposition on which to found his theory.

-think about this historically: analogy btwqn two disparate kinds of
thought. Argumet is, in effect, that structure of theory is imported
from a distal point and reapplied to the new formation/but also/

that Thompson's nat-phil arguments are crafted to /fit into /a
theological structure.

So, e.g\.: question of reconciling conserrvation of enerygy with
necessity of prudence and minimizing waste. “The fact is, it may I
believe be demonstrated that work is lost to man irrecoverably, but not
lost in the material world.” Work dissipates forever, but without
violating essential un ity of universe -- energy, fundamental stuff,
conserved.

*** A variety of other unsorted stuff
/Arbeitskraft/ (from Rabinbach)

/Kraft=energy/ is old philosophical idea. cf. Schelling: Urkraft or /vis
viva/ that undergirds universe.

Helmholtz uses term “Arbeitskraft” = labour power.

Hermann v.n Helmholtz (1821-1894). starts with body, not with machines;
but in a particular way.

machine and organism twins seperated t birth. descartes, vaucanson

Remnder: Ritter and research on anaimal electricity, quest for a life
force.

-supplemented ancient doctrine of /animal heat/: claims special source
of heat produced in animal bodies.

-like electricity, heat thoroughly investigated in c. 19. from caloric
to energetic account.

-investigations of animal heat and vital forces carried out by Johannes
Müller (1801-58), Berlin Prof,, leading figure in German physiology, who
performed very precise experiments in an effort to identify the
specifically vital nature of life force.

many of the most important German physiologists of mid-century were
trained by Müller, including e.g. /Helmholtz/, whom we already know.

-so problem of /heat/ remains really important one in mid-century, but
recast in terms of thermodynamics: where does body's energy come from?

-Justus Liebig: drawing on new chemistry developed by Lavoisier, argues
1842 in /Thierchemie,/ 1845 in /Thierische Wärme/ that ‘all heat
produced by an animal body necissarily deried from respired oxygen...:
that the heat was produced by combintion of the respired oxygen with
elementay carbon and hydrogen in the portions of food absorbed into the
bloodstream.

-so heat comes /exclusively / from chemical, electrical, mechanical
forces.

-rejected any vital force.

-this b/c “no force, no activity can arise alone out of nothing” (no
perpetual motion)

-so body follows same laws as other objects: e.g., steam engines,
electric circuits.

-Liebig's work helps inspire group of disaffected students of Müller,
esp. Helmholtz & Du Bois-Reymond, to pusue a /purely physicalist
physiology/. 1842 DBR and others had sworn an oath ‘to defend the truth
that there are no other forces in the organism except physicochemical
forces and that these are always reducible to repulsive and attractive
components.” (Lenoir 84)

-1847 Helmholtz, Du Bois Reymond, Carl Brücke, and Carl Ludwig, founded
the /Berleiner Physikalische Gesellschaft/, and became known as the
“Group of 1847” for their insisence on principles DBR had outlined in
1842. Through their journal /Fortschritte der Physik/, they promulgated
idea of /human body as physical system, bound by the laws of mechanics,
and especially /thermodynamics.

-assisted in thisby kymograh, which allows one to visualize the body as
a machine like Watt's engine.

-instruments reify body as machine

-1852, Helmholtz, myograph “It is a spectacle for Gods, to see the
muscle working like the cylinder of a steam engine”

-Helmholtz, /BPG/ as /German nationalist science. /

1848: revolution. attempt of 1848 group to attach themselves to rising
elite that fails to rise.

-revoutions of 1848.

development in Prussia of pure technocracy that cuts self loose from
liberalism.

--> so immediate target is physical explanation of organism, espcially
Vital Heat.

--> perhaps more directly than Thompson (but maybe not more than Joue)
/Helmholtz's idea of “work”/ /isunderstood to be immejdiately accessible
by our idea of labour. “The concept of work for machines or ndatual
processes is taken from the comparison wih the work performance of
hum,an beings, and is... comprehensible htrough a comparison with human
labor.” (Rabinbach, 59)/

“New technology of the industrial age thus produ ecd a new image of the
body whose origins lie in labor power. The body is not simply analogous
to, but essentially ientical with a tehrmodynamic machine: “The animal
body therefore does not differ from the steam-engine as regards the
anner in which it obtains heat and force, but does differ from it in the
purpose for, and manner in which the force gianed is employed.” ../. the
eenergy of the violinist's body and the energy output of the industrial
mill are ijdentical: both represent labor power.

Babbage (1791-1871): automata: attempts to locate the specifical3ly
human. Babbage: invert thias, try to make the specifical;ly human
/mechanical/.

2. expiation of thermodyyn as cultural phenomenon (
* Evolution
- resoures:
  galtongalton- file:///home/matt/Dropbox/Work/History/BecomingModern/324/Notes/07_FrenchDarwinism.txt
  - [[~/Dropbox/Work/INF1501/reveal-whoops/RLG/older-versions/06-darwin.org]]
  - [[~/Dropbox/Work/Religion/RLG231/Lectures/older-versions/06-darwin.org]]
  - [[~/Dropbox/Work/Religion/RLG231/Lectures/AllLectures.org]]
  - 
* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Foucault (does this really still belong here? 
Foucault Lecture:

I. Background on Foucault:

Born in 1926, growing up in Provincial France under the Vichy occupation, starts studies immediately after liberation in 1945, in era of Sartre, at Paris' Ecole Normale Superieure. In early years allied with Structuralists, the philosophical and anthropological movement ascendant in post-war period. Like some of his teachers and fellow students, F. suffered serious nervous breakdowns as a student in the high-p[ressure environment of the Ecole Normale Sup. His earliest writings, setting the tone for a career of rebellious, controversial, and aggressive philosophizing, were biting attacks on the humanistic phsychoanalytic treatments that had been applied to him at the Ecole, in the room later occupied by Jacques Derrida, and Louis Althusser (before he killed his wife!).

In abandoning Freud Foucault cast his lot with the most aggressive and radical French philosophers, who disagreed vehemently with both Sartre's Communism and the Frankfurt School's aspirations to unite Freud and Marx. He was closest philosophically and personally to fellow Normalien Giles Deleuze, who later wrote a book about Foucault and, still later, dying of cancer and confined by an oxygen tank, committed an act of auto-defenestration from his Paris apartment. Foucault himself died in 1984 of AIDSa death which was widely seen as symbolic of his Nietzschian commitment to perversity and the pursuit, both intellectual and physical, or sexuality.

Over his life Foucault wrote rather prolifically, as the 2500 pages of posthumously-collected short works, and the long bibliography of published books, attest. We are concerned today with the most important works of his so-called "middle" or "geneological" period.

In the late 1960's, Foucault had published a mammoth book under the title "Les Mots et les Choses", in English "The order of Things". Calling himself an "Archeologist of the past," Foucault treated the past as a set of geological strata which could be investigated more or less seperately from each other. Each epoch had a particular "historical formation", a unified order of knowledge; the boundary between epochs was characterized by discontinuity, and Foucault made no effort to ocnnect the historical epochs together. So no accounts of change; instead, snapshots of underlying structures of knowledge that characterize individual epochs.

In "The Order of Things," Foucault talks about a disjunction sometime around 1800: a rupture in the order of knowledge, which produces a new constellation organized around the sciences of man. New kinds of investigations of language, biology, (labour?)organize a wholly new understanding of humanness.

This all forms the backdrop to F's geneological works, of which "Discipline & Punish" and "The History of Sexuality, vol 1" are the best and the best-known. In these works Foucault turns from his osmewhat stultifying claims about the nature of knowledge in general to investigate the historical nature of human subjectivity.

geneological phase: look at moments in the historical formation of human nature.

History of Sexuality: What is sexuality? what';s it significance? how should we understand it? is it historically ocntingent or eternal?

History of Punishment: what does history of punishmentz & especially prisons tell us about who we are, or how we understand ourselves, or the condition of modernity? What's the relationship between surveillance, discipline, punishmento n one hand, subjectivity -- our self-understanDing, the lens t hrough which we understand and experience ourselves -- on the other.

Best version of general thesis is in Right of Death and Power over Life

-fundamental shift in nature of sovereignty in last 200 years -- control over life vs. /power/ to impose death.

discipines: analtomo-politics of the human body.

body as machine: optimization of capabilities, extoreion of force, increase in its usefulness and docility, integration into systems

regulatory contro;ls: bio-politics of the population

species body: propagation, births/mortality, level of health, life
expectancey/longevity

2 poles: individuating & specifying death --> adminsistration of bodies & management of life.

institutions of power less important than /techniques/ of power.

biohistory: pressures through which movements of life and proccesses of history interfere with one another; biopower: what brought life into the realm of explicit calculations & made knwoledge-power an agent of transformation of human life.

realization of human potential as right.

role of sciences?

d & p:

history of modern soul on trial (23) what's the soul? cf. 29: Rather
than seeing this soul asthe reactivated remnants of aon ideology, one
would see it as the present correlative of a certain technology of power
over the bodyz. the soul... exists, it has a reality, it is produced
permanently aorund, on , within the body bu the functioning of a power
that is exercised on those punished -- and in a more general way, on
those one supervises, trains and corrects, over madmen, children,

discipline, 141 ff:

enclosurepartitioning

functional sites...

instrumental coding of the body. over the whole surface of contact btwm
body & object power is introduced, fasteing them to owne another...
(153)

164: discipline not art of distributing bodies, of extracting time form
them and accummulating it

composing forces in order to obtain an efficient machine

167: fdiscipline creates out of the bodies it controls four types of
individuality: 4 characteristics: cellular, organic, geneic,
combinatory.

means of correct training: judgment; =--=-
)
* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Chicago and Petersburg.

Today talking about two cities which, unlike Paris, were constructed /ex
nihilo/ in the 18^{th} and 19^{th} centuries, and which were both
conceived as a kind of hypermodern exercise.

Petersburg was conceived as an answer to the west, raised up like
Faust's city from a primeval muck to become one of the great
metropolises of Europe. Chicago, in 1900 the only one of the world's
largest cities which hadn't existed at all in 1800, was seen by
Americans and Europeans alike as the very embodiment of modernity, even
more, perhaps, than Paris. I want to start, though, with a structure
built in neither of these cities, but in one of the oldest cities in
Europe, and in the mid-nineteenth century, certainly its largest and
perhaps its most exciting. Not Paris: London.

The Crystal Palace (pics) was completed in 1851 by Joseph Paxton, a
previously little-known architect. The Palace housed the 1851 Great
Exhibition, a monumental exhibition of the productive capacities of the
world's industrial countries, but also more than that. (more on
exhibition of peoples, etc). We'll have occasion to discuss the 1851
Exhibition and the institution of World's Fairs they spawned twice more
during the course: a few minutes from now, when we discuss Chicago, and
a couple of weeks from now, when we talk about Commodity Culture. But
for now all tat matters to us is the Palace itself. Built to house a
great showcase of Progress, the Palace was the showcase of modernity
itself. Built of glass and steel, the Palace resembled nothing so much
as a giant greenhouse of perfect proportions, set upon a hill
overlooking park lands throughout the city.

Popularity of the exhibition. Going to the fair.

Among the 100's of 1000's or Millions of visitors to the Crystal Palace,
which after the Exhibition was moved to a park designe;d by Paxton and
turned into a kind of museum), was Russian journalistsNikolai
Chernyshevsky. Chernychevsky (1828-1889), son of a Russian Orthodox
priest, was born in the industrial city of Saratov, and studied in St.
Petersburg before becoming a journalist, joining the staff of the
radical journal /The Contemporary/ in 1855. Increasingly radical,
Chernychevsky was arrested on vague political chargesi n 1862 -- in a
wave of arrests that followed Alexander's emancipation of the serfs in
1861 and the supsequent agitation ofr more radical political change. C.
would endu up spending the next 20 years in prison, for the most part in
Siberia, and would only be released near the end of his life. While in
prison Chewrnyshevsky wrote prodigiously, andi n particular completed
one of the worst, yet most influential, Russian novels of the 19^{th}
cnetury. Entitlesd “What is to Be Done?” Widely recognized as a dismal
aesthetic failure, Chernychevsky's Utopian essay was nonetheless hugely
influential on radical Russian intellectuals, who saw it as a vision of
a new, fully modenrized, Russia. Lenin calledi t his favorite novel, and
both Lenin and Tolstoy stole the title for manifestos of their own.
Subtitled “Tales of New People”, Chernychevasky's novel purports to tell
a story of the /new breed/ who will inhabit a modern, emancipated Russia
of the future.

Chernychevsky famously invoked the Crystal Palace in /What is To Be
Done? /-- a Palace which he had glimpsed from afar during a trip to
London in the 1850's. He invokes a world built only of Crystal Palaces,
set miles away from each other, each reachig high up into the heavens.
Each Palace is its own urban environment: workshops, living
arrangements, ballrooms, reFectories... These units of several1000
people are rationally administered by a benign and rational authority,
and each Palace is self-sufficient. Cities like Petersburg, Paris,
london, have disappeared.

For Chernysehevsky, the original Crystal Palace of London becomes a kind
of metaphor of perfect, state-regulated modernity -- A physical
manifestation of the Utopian projects of Fourier and others.

It is Chernychevsky and his novel who are perhaps the principal targets
of Dostoyevsky's cuttingly satirical novel, /Notes form Uderground/. It
is possibly a direct reply to the following challenge issued by
Chernyshevsky's hero:

...I will always do what I want. I will never sacrifice naything, not
even a whim, for the sake of something I do not desire. What I want,
with all my heart, is to make people happy. In this lies my happiness.
Mine! Can you hear that, you, in your underground hole? (/Notes,/
foreword, xiv)

Seeral episodes in D's novel are parodic inversions of episodes in C's
novel -- especia;lly the encounter with the soldier, and the theme of
the prostitute's redemption.

In a minute I'll come back to the Palace, but maybe first a few words
about D. and the circumstances in which he writtes. Fyodor Dostoevsky
was born 1821 in the hospital for the poor in Moscow. A graduate of the
Military engineering academy, Dostoyevsky, much like Chernyshevsky, took
up writing as a career relatively early, writing both journalism and
fiction. Though a monarchist, he had ties to Utopian Socialists and
other agitators, and opposed the principal of serfdom; in 1849 he was
arrested and spent four years in prison. (famous story of death
sentence, cf. Borges story).

Like Chernychevsky, D. spent his whole professional life in Petersburg,
a city raised from the swamp by Peter and built on the bones of untold
thousands of peasant labourers. Built to house the monumental structures
of the Russian autocracy, Petersburg was a bizarrre mixture of modernist
impulses -- Petersburg faces West, Moscow East -- and authoritari;an
political powers that seem reminiscent of much earlier days. By the
19^{th} century, Petersburg housed not only the government, and the
burgeoning bureacuracy of civil service, but also all the institutions
of Russian alearning: a university, an academy of sciences, a military
engineering academy. It also incereasingly became home ot a more or less
autonomous literary tradition, a tradition which counts amo\ng its
luminaries Pushkin, Gogol, and Dostoevsky. This tradition grappled
constantly with the tensions between Petersburg's modern pretentions and
Russia's autocratic monarchy; between clerks and aristocrats; between
the industrial surroundings of the city and the immense rural
hinter;lands of the Empire; between the pull of Moscow and the influence
of Berlin and Paris. D makes sure we know that the urban setting is
important, e.g when the Um declares that “...to be overly conscious is a
sickness... for man's everylday use, ordinary human consciousness would
be more than enough; that is, a half, a quarter of the portion that
falls to the lot of a developed man in our unfortunate nineteenth
century, who, on top of that, has the added misfortune of residing in
Petersburg, the most abstract and intentional city on the entire globe.
(6-7)

See how D uses term “intentional”. /Notes/ is a complex, nuanced, and
often perplexing reaction to the Utopianism of the 1860's, which in some
ways can be read as a sort of /Aufhebung/ of the Petersburg literary
tradition. The protagonist is perhaps the single least likeable hero of
any novel ever written -- pathetic, wracked by indecision, obsessed with
petty details of self-presentation, also singulardly unsuccessful in
everything he udnertakes. The portrayal is so unrelentingly critical,
and self-critical, that the relationship btwn authorial voice fand
narration is very difficult to unravel. And yet some of the Underground
Man's madly scribbled lines are ruthlessly inspiring.

For us, /Notes/ serves as perhaps the most perfect critique of
Utopianism produced in the late Nineteenth century. On the one hand, the
Underground Man is profoundly influenced by Utopianism; on the other, he
is deeply critical of every aspect of the Utopian programme.

I'd like to take up just two or three of the points of the UM's
ocmplaint against rationality and the Utopian builders of Crystal
Palaces. cf. 24-25

Here D. raises a damningly powerful objection to Utopianism: that maybe
our desires simply can't be made rational. UM embraces the perversity of
desire as essential to fulfillment. Wha if I don't want to be happy? he
asks? then what? then how will your Crystal Palices, your hsimmering
Utopias, work for me? (cf. Keanu in the Architect's room in Matrix II).

D here celebrates the irrationality of human nature, ore if not exactly
celebrates, demands that it be recognizedc. He therefore sets himself
apart from the whole tradition of progresssive thinking that
characterizes most of the enduring works of the c. 19. Above all he's
critical of the Utidlitarian impuLse to cfaracterize every personal and
social decision as a rationadl weighing of relatie pleasures and
advantage -- that is, o

f turning the moral unierse into a realm of economic rationality. D.
reacts to this with a diatribe against what my translation calls
“profit.” e.g. 20, “What is to be done with the millions of facts
testifying to how people /knowlingly/, trhat is, fully understanding
their real profit, would put it i seecond pflace and throw themselves
onto another path, a risk, fa perchance, not compelled by anyone or
anything, bnut precisely as if they simply ;did not want the designated
path... Profit!@ whatt is prodfit? And will you take it upon yourself to
define with perfect exactitude precies\ly what man's profit consists in?
and what if it so happens that /on occasion....etc. “Has man's profit
been calculated quite correctly/

. And yet at the same time, he can't be said to be rigidly antimodern.
cf. encounter with the soldier. pp55 &preceding.

- so next time, think about D. as “anti-modern” and wonder whether that
picture holds up entirely. What does D. replace the modernist,
utilitarian view of selfhood with? Is it “anti-modern” or not?

So see D. as /not/ ifnal chapter in story ofm odernity, but nonethelesfs
as completing our story in a certain way -- as filing a space that had
been left empty in our earlier discussions.

Chicago, on the other hand, is quite another story. Linked to Petersburg
and Dostoevsky in more than one (admittedly tangentijal) way. Like
Petersburg, Chicago created ex nihilo. ofunded 1803, in 1830 “6 or 7
families” -- from 1850 to 1890 grows ca. 36x to 1.1 million=6^{th}
largest city/world.

symbol of frontier, of change, of America, of future. pride in pace of
commerce & life. widely visited, commented on, and studied by Europeans,
who were sometimes awestruck, sometimes deeply dismayed, never blasé.

Chicago also inherits klegacy of Crystal Palace, as does Dostoevsky.
1851 first “world's fair”, 1889=paris, 1893=Columbian World's Fair, by
far biggest & mostexpensive of World's Fairs.

-chicago as apotheosis of western civilization. White city. displays of
goods and peopleas. Questions about race.

But focus is on former -- on what C. calls Nlature's Metropolis. By
focussing on Chicago and Coron's arguments try to bring to light an
element of modernity/modern urbanism we'e discussed but maybe not fully
grappled with, namely, dependence on transformations of the natural
world.

In part of book not reading, C discusses idea of First and Second
Nature. Probably worth exploring. Hegel & Marx also use this
terminology.

“First” n\ature: = original, prehuman;

“Second” Nature -- artificial nature we erect atop firdst nature.

C's thesis: that Chicago's history is the history of the ttransformaiton
& appropriation of the natural environment surrounding the city. city &
country are not “seperate & opposing worlds” (17) but mutually
reinforcing & indeed mutualsly necessary entities.

-note the environmentalist fallout

In early c. 19, Chicago one of several cities struggling to ocntrol the
vast hinterlands west of the Mississipi -- including St. Slouis,
Minneapolis, WInnipeg. Key elementi n Chicago's ascension:
transformation of vaast western space into zones of human activity
radiating out from Chicago. Chicago i”Nature's Metropolis” = dependent
on natural resources in extraordinarty way.

First big victory: getting railroads to travel through city, makes C.
“nec point of passage” for all commodities travelling East. Railroad
time & space on a massive scale.

1^{st} & second nature: pricing thefuture. abstraction of grain
commodities. confrontation of 1^{st} & second natures.

Meat: mechanizkaiton of slaughter: prairies transformed; bison
eliminated; fences; densification of herds; “storing the winter”

--meat industry as biopower. management of life & energy;

-feed lots like grain elevators: feed is in Chicago: why not bring there
to slaughter. value of a porcine life changes over time.

-- so Chicago notjust conquest of space, but time as well -- futures AND
feed lots (which stave off decay of loife) AND refrigeration.

- disassembly line

- meat packing replacing butchery.
- -refrigerator cars*...
- --brofit margins on refuse=rationalization of industry.


* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Machine Culutre v. 1 (starts w/ Mark Twain)
Machine Culture

(lecture 15, jan 2005)

Samuel Clemens was born in Florida, Missouri, in 1835, in what was then
a frontier settlement soon to become the first great battleground in the
civil struggle over American slasvery. Apprenticed to a printer at the
age of 12, Clemens moved to New Orleans shortly before the American
Civil War (1857) and became a Steamship Pilot on the Mississippi river.
When the aCivil War enaded stezamship traffic on the river, Clemens
moved out West to work for his abolitionist brother after a short stint
as a volunteer in the Confederate army; by 1862 he was using the
pseudonym “Mark Twain”, taken from the streamship trade, to sign his
articles in various western newspapers. In the post-war period he became
an international literary celebrity, moving first to New York City and
then to the outskirts of the great industrial city of Hartford,
Connecticut. He wrote some of the most important popular literary works
of American fiction, most notably Huck Finn, which was a critical
examnation of race relations in the Antebellum South. As a chrincler of
the South who had taken up residence in the North, Twain occupied an
unusual position in the history of American letters, torn between an
affection for the country of his upbringing and an evangelical faith in
progress and the Industrial North. He famously invested in all manner of
technological innovations -- most notably the typewriter -- but this
habit repeatedly impoverished him, so that his maniacal writing pace was
largely due to the necessity of sustaining himself and his family.

/Connecticut Yankee/ was written in 1889, when Clemens was some 54 years
old, and about 20 years before Clemens' death in 1910. It tells the
story, as you know, of a Yankee engineer -- a Yankee of the Yankees --
mysteriously transported back to the days of King Arthur. Establishing
himself as a power in the Court by virtue of his knowledge and gumption,
the Yankee sets out to transform the very foundations of medieval
society, only to be thwarted in the end by the ignorance, malevodlence,
and stupidity of the Established Church and of ordinary people.

We read the book in this class as a kind of fable about progress. It is
told by a American; but it was avidly read by Europeans as well,
Europeans who looked to America as the source of the new tomorrow. And
it was not accidental that its author stemmed from the town of Hartford.

Capital of the great state of Connecticut, an area almost as big as
metropolitan Toronto, Hartford's rise in the ranks of industry began
just a year after Clemens was born. In 1836, Samuel Colt opened his
first factory for the production of the “repeating revolver,” a weapon
with which you are all familiar (first factory failed). Every cowboy
carries his Colt .45 in every Western you've ever seen. Why? We can give
at least two answers:

 -an intense marketing campaign of a kind rarely seen before the 1840's.

-the tremendous power of (1) interchangeable parts, and (2) the
repeating action of semi-automatic weapons.

Colt revolvers were deployed throughout the 1840's and 50's in the
frontier campaign of extermination against the American Indians of the
Great Plains, and ubiquitously used by Union Army officers in the Civil
War. By the 1870's, the Colt company was world-famous for its 6- &
12-shooters, but also for its tremendously efficient factories and the
very clever design of interchangeable parts.

- remember interchangeable parts?

After 1876, when the great German engineer Franz Reuleaux declared
German goods “billig & schlecht” at the Philadelphia Centennial
Exhibition, Colt's products AND its industrial methods were perhaps the
single most exemplary modeal of the so called “American Method” -- the
method that forward-looking European engineers hoped to bring back home.
Hartford was the most common stop on the American Tour of French and
German engineers & industrialists, who hoped to bring the best of
America back home with them.

1876 inaugurated a long period -- decades-long -- of enthusiastic, even
slavvish, imitation of sAmericcan methods of production by Europeans.
This “Amerikanismus” was by no means at its head when Twain published
/Connecticut Yankee/. In fact the real fascination with America --
Amerikanismus -- was only just beginning. Perhaps the single most
important development in this story is the publication in in 1911 of
F.W. Taylor's /princip/les of Scientific Management/. ./ Taylor was a
Philadelphia engineer who plphia engineer who began to acquire some
notoreity in the last decade of the c. 19 for his Scientific Management.
This system, which was exported under the label of Taylorism &l, n
Europe at least, quickly m,erged with home-grown sciences of the body
and efficiency, was an attempt to fully revamp the organization of work
in the modern factory. Five principles:

1) division of tasks into fundamental parts;
2) 2) analysis and design ofeach task to achieve max efficiency;
3) 3) redesign of tools and machines in accordance w/ standards
4) 4) piece-work pay;
5) 5) rational coordination and administration of production.

In following years, esp. b4, during, & immediately after WW I, a huge
social debate arose over practice of Taylorism....

-”deskilling,” end of skilled labourers monopoly on expertise.

-aylorism merged seamlessly w/ “Fordism”, practice of high wages,
assembly-ine automation, consumtion + production...

 ---> in America, Taylorism often cast in terms of FREEDOM. In Europe,
it's about RATIONAL MANAGEMENT.

------> but in 1889 Taylor was still a nobody labouring in his
shop-floor supervising job in Pennsylvania. Mark Twain, on the otherh
and, was arguably the most popular writer in the United States

. So what he says about industry has a particular importance, in part
insofar as it helps to solidify the /image/ of the /Yankee Engineer/ in
the culture of late c. 19 America, Europe. What does he tell us?

-parable? of American, self-made, who possesses both know-how and
determination. Also, despite fundamentally amoral stance towards the
world, has certain strong convictions: in particular, that the Church is
fundamentally opposed to all forms of progress & emancipation.

-tech. superiority is somehow almost /necessarily/ moral superiority.
Machines as the measure of man.

-moreover, strong tie btwn progress & markets. Capital=virtue.

-emancipatory capacity of technology is phenomenal.

-20:

 geology hadn't been invented yet... I made a note of the remark, and

calculated to educate the commonwealth up to it if I pulled through.

It is no use to throw a good thing away merely because the market isn't

ripe yet.

24: these animals didn't reason: ... they never put this and that

together;... all their talk showed that they didn't know a discrepancy

when they saw it.

 34ff: destruction of the castle: modernity as destruction...

39Befor the day of the hurch#s supremacy in he world, men were men,

and held their heads up, and ha d a man#s pride and spirit and

indepenence; and what of greatness and position a person got, he got

mainly by achievement, not by birth. but thenthe Church came to the

front, with an ax to grind, and she was wise, subtle, and knew more

than one way to skin a cat-- or a nation; she invented "divine right

of kngs", & propped it all around, brick by brick, with teh

Beautitudes... were nhing them from their good purpose to make them

fortify an evil one

40: of course that taint, that reverence for rank and title, had been

in our American blood, too -- I know that; but when I left America it

had disappeared--at least to all intents and purposes....

42: patent office.

47ff: central bit. I was pretty well satisfied with what I had already

accomplished. In various quite nooks and corners I had the beginnings

of all sorts of industries under way -- nuclei of future vast

factories, the iron and steel missionaries of my future civilization.

In these were gathered together ... I was training a crowd of ignorant

folk in to experts -- experts in every sort of handiwork and

scientific calling. "nurseries..." "teacher factory"

65: loyalty to one's country. whyfor?

SO: world battle btwn yankee pluck and Euopean convervatism. Yankee
engineering, like Taylorism, as rational reconstruction of social
orxcer. But it fails. Why?

II. Organic Physics

In late c. 19, machiens are “measure of man” in two ways:

1) machiens as single mosti mportant yardstick of social progress;
2) machines as increasingly important intervention into understanding
   human biology.

Most owed to Karl Ludwig & Group of 1847.

sources on 1847: cranefield 1957 (J Hist Med) on organic physics

machine and organism twins seperated t birth. descartes, vaucanson

Remnder: Ritter and research on anaimal electricity, quest for a life
force.

-supplemented ancient doctrine of /animal heat/: claims special source
of heat produced in animal bodies.

-like electricity, heat thoroughly investigated in c. 19. from caloric
to energetic account.

-investigations of animal heat and vital forces carried out by Johannes
Müller (1801-58), Berlin Prof,, leading figure in German physiology, who
performed very precise experiments in an effort to identify the
specifically vital nature of life force.

many of the most important German physiologists of mid-century were
trained by Müller, including e.g. /Helmholtz/, whom we already know.

-so problem of /heat/ remains really important one in mid-century, but
recast in terms of thermodynamics: where does body's energy come from?

-Justus Liebig: drawing on new chemistry developed by Lavoisier, argues
1842 in /Thierchemie,/ 1845 in /Thierische Wärme/ that ‘al+

l heat produced by an animal body necissarily deried from respired
oxygen...: that the heat was roduced by combintion of the respired
oxygen with elementay carbon and hydrogen in the portions of food
absorbed into the bloodstream.

-so heat comes /exclusively / from chemical, electrical, mechanical
forces.

-rejected any vital force.

-this b/c “no force, no activity can arise alone out of nothing” (no
perpetual motion)

-so body follows same laws as other objects: e.g., steam engines,
electric circuits.

-Liebig's work helps inspire group of disaffected students of Müller,
esp. Helmholtz & Du Bois-Reymond, to pusue a /purely physicalist
physiology/. 1842 DBR and others had sworn an oath ‘to defend the truth
that there are no other forces in the organism except physicochemical
forces and that these are always reducible to repulsive and attractive
components.” (Lenoir 84)

-1847 Helmholtz, Du Bois Reymond, Carl Brücke, and Carl Ludwig, founded
the /Berleiner Physikalische Gesellschaft/, and became known as the
“Group of 1847” for their insisence on principles DBR had outlined in
1842. Through their journal /Fortschritte der Physik/, they promulgated
idea of /human body as physical system, bound by the laws of mechanics,
and especially /thermodynamics.

-assisted in thisby kymograh, which allows one to visualize the body as
a machine like Watt's engine.

-instruments reify body as machine

-1852, Helmholtz, myograph “It is a spectacle for Gods, to see the
muscle working like the cylinder of a steam engine”

-Helmholtz, /BPG/ as /German nationalist science. /

1848: revolution. attempt of 1848 group to attach themselves to rising
elite that fails to rise.

-revoutions of 1848.

development in Prussia of pure technocracy that cuts self loose from
liberalism.

Meanwhilek, in France, sep. developments. Second empir as technocratic
projec in some respects, but in 1860's increasing perception in france
of inferiority to Prussian science. Social conservatives remained
strongly anti-Prussian, (e.g. Claude Bernard, of
homeostasis/normal/pathological fame) but others start looking to
Prussia as a guide.

-in physiology, Group of 1847 gains adherents in Paris (esp. DBR,
Helmholtz).

-most famous of these was Etienne-Jules Marey

Marey: b 1830 in Côte d'Or, sone of the steward of a wine house. wanted
to be an engineer, but trained as physician. arrived in Paris 1849, in
wake of revolution.

1859: circulaiton of the blood, elasticity

-1869: invents /sphygomograph. (non-invasive)/ Napoleon III court
incident

-“was never really a physiologist or a doctor in the usual sense of
those terms, but above all, an engineer of life”

-opposed to C. Bernard, who rejected physical, mechanical metaphors, and
supported wholistic explanations.

 -everythingi n motion.

Marey's position strengthened by French defeatin 1870-71.

-graphic method. perfection of senses. objectivity.

-chronophotgraphy. revolver.

-Eiffel Tower, physiological station.

Phyysiology of Labour. efficiencies, analysis.

3. Chronophotography. Attemp[tto capture dynamic nature of living
   machine. Photographs & graphic instruments as substitutions for
   subjectivity.

Taylorism, scientific management

Amerikanismus

interchangeable parts

Yankee Engineer

 Fooucault, ‘combination' of partsL Latour, combijnation of immutable
mobiles; move on towards factory work, standards, war.
)

* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): another version of machine culture
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: lecture
  :END:

** Mass Production
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: mass-production
   :END:

*** Interchangeable Parts (recap)
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: interchangeable-parts-recap
    :END:

mention: foucault, combinatin of parts

latour, combinatino of immutable mobiles

factory work

standards

*** Mass Production on Display (exhibitions -- recap)
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: mass-production-on-display-exhibitions-recap
    :END:

*** Triumph of American Production
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: triumph-of-american-production
    :END:

*** Taylorism and Amerikanismus
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: taylorism-and-amerikanismus
    :END:

The Taylorist vision of control

Resistance and the Streit um die Technik in America and Europe

*** Taylorism
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: taylorism
    :END:

1876 inaugurated a long period -- decades-long -- of enthusiastic, even
slavvish, imitation of sAmericcan methods of production by Europeans.
This “Amerikanismus” was by no means at its head when Twain published
/Connecticut Yankee/. In fact the real fascination with America --
Amerikanismus -- was only just beginning. Perhaps the single most
important development in this story is the publication in in 1911 of
F.W. Taylor's /princip/les of Scientific Management/. ./ Taylor was a
Philadelphia engineer who plphia engineer who began to acquire some
notoreity in the last decade of the c. 19 for his Scientific Management.
This system, which was exported under the label of Taylorism &l, n
Europe at least, quickly m,erged with home-grown sciences of the body
and efficiency, was an attempt to fully revamp the organization of work
in the modern factory. Five principles:

1) division of tasks into fundamental parts;
2) 2) analysis and design ofeach task to achieve max efficiency;
3) 3) redesign of tools and machines in accordance w/ standards
4) 4) piece-work pay;
5) 5) rational coordination and administration of production.

In following years, esp. b4, during, & immediately after WW I, a huge
social debate arose over practice of Taylorism....

-”deskilling,” end of skilled labourers monopoly on expertise.

-aylorism merged seamlessly w/ “Fordism”, practice of high wages,
assembly-ine automation, consumtion + production...

 ---> in America, Taylorism often cast in terms of FREEDOM. In Europe,
it's about RATIONAL MANAGEMENT.

------> but in 1889 Taylor was still a nobody labouring in his
shop-floor supervising job in Pennsylvania. Mark Twain, on the otherh
and, was arguably the most popular writer in the United States

. So what he says about industry has a particular importance, in part
insofar as it helps to solidify the /image/ of the /Yankee Engineer/ in
the culture of late c. 19 America, Europe. What does he tell us?

** Mark Twain and the Yankee Engineer
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: mark-twain-and-the-yankee-engineer
   :END:

*** biography
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: biography
    :END:

Samuel Clemens was born in Florida, Missouri, in 1835, in what was then
a frontier settlement soon to become the first great battleground in the
civil struggle over American slasvery. Apprenticed to a printer at the
age of 12, Clemens moved to New Orleans shortly before the American
Civil War (1857) and became a Steamship Pilot on the Mississippi river.
When the aCivil War enaded stezamship traffic on the river, Clemens
moved out West to work for his abolitionist brother after a short stint
as a volunteer in the Confederate army; by 1862 he was using the
pseudonym “Mark Twain”, taken from the streamship trade, to sign his
articles in various western newspapers. In the post-war period he became
an international literary celebrity, moving first to New York City and
then to the outskirts of the great industrial city of Hartford,
Connecticut. He wrote some of the most important popular literary works
of American fiction, most notably Huck Finn, which was a critical
examnation of race relations in the Antebellum South. As a chrincler of
the South who had taken up residence in the North, Twain occupied an
unusual position in the history of American letters, torn between an
affection for the country of his upbringing and an evangelical faith in
progress and the Industrial North. He famously invested in all manner of
technological innovations -- most notably the typewriter -- but this
habit repeatedly impoverished him, so that his maniacal writing pace was
largely due to the necessity of sustaining himself and his family.

/Connecticut Yankee/ was written in 1889, when Clemens was some 54 years
old, and about 20 years before Clemens' death in 1910. It tells the
story, as you know, of a Yankee engineer -- a Yankee of the Yankees --
mysteriously transported back to the days of King Arthur. Establishing
himself as a power in the Court by virtue of his knowledge and gumption,
the Yankee sets out to transform the very foundations of medieval
society, only to be thwarted in the end by the ignorance, malevodlence,
and stupidity of the Established Church and of ordinary people.

We read the book in this class as a kind of fable about progress. It is
told by a American; but it was avidly read by Europeans as well,
Europeans who looked to America as the source of the new tomorrow. And
it was not accidental that its author stemmed from the town of Hartford.

*** Colt and Hartford
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: colt-and-hartford
    :END:

Capital of the great state of Connecticut, an area almost as big as
metropolitan Toronto, Hartford's rise in the ranks of industry began
just a year after Clemens was born. In 1836, Samuel Colt opened his
first factory for the production of the “repeating revolver,” a weapon
with which you are all familiar (first factory failed). Every cowboy
carries his Colt .45 in every Western you've ever seen. Why? We can give
at least two answers:

 -an intense marketing campaign of a kind rarely seen before the 1840's.

-the tremendous power of (1) interchangeable parts, and (2) the
repeating action of semi-automatic weapons.

Colt revolvers were deployed throughout the 1840's and 50's in the
frontier campaign of extermination against the American Indians of the
Great Plains, and ubiquitously used by Union Army officers in the Civil
War. By the 1870's, the Colt company was world-famous for its 6- &
12-shooters, but also for its tremendously efficient factories and the
very clever design of interchangeable parts.

- remember interchangeable parts?

After 1876, when the great German engineer Franz Reuleaux declared
German goods “billig & schlecht” at the Philadelphia Centennial
Exhibition, Colt's products AND its industrial methods were perhaps the
single most exemplary modeal of the so called “American Method” -- the
method that forward-looking European engineers hoped to bring back home.
Hartford was the most common stop on the American Tour of French and
German engineers & industrialists, who hoped to bring the best of
America back home with them.

*** Plot of Book
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: plot-of-book
    :END:

-parable? of American, self-made, who possesses both know-how and
determination. Also, despite fundamentally amoral stance towards the
world, has certain strong convictions: in particular, that the Church is
fundamentally opposed to all forms of progress & emancipation.

-tech. superiority is somehow almost /necessarily/ moral superiority.
Machines as the measure of man.

-moreover, strong tie btwn progress & markets. Capital=virtue.

-emancipatory capacity of technology is phenomenal.

*** quotes...
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: quotes...
    :END:

-20:

 geology hadn't been invented yet... I made a note of the remark, and

calculated to educate the commonwealth up to it if I pulled through.

It is no use to throw a good thing away merely because the market isn't

ripe yet.

24: these animals didn't reason: ... they never put this and that

together;... all their talk showed that they didn't know a discrepancy

when they saw it.

 34ff: destruction of the castle: modernity as destruction...

39Befor the day of the hurch#s supremacy in he world, men were men,

and held their heads up, and ha d a man#s pride and spirit and

indepenence; and what of greatness and position a person got, he got

mainly by achievement, not by birth. but thenthe Church came to the

front, with an ax to grind, and she was wise, subtle, and knew more

than one way to skin a cat-- or a nation; she invented "divine right

of kngs", & propped it all around, brick by brick, with teh

Beautitudes... were nhing them from their good purpose to make them

fortify an evil one

40: of course that taint, that reverence for rank and title, had been

in our American blood, too -- I know that; but when I left America it

had disappeared--at least to all intents and purposes....

42: patent office.

47ff: central bit. I was pretty well satisfied with what I had already

accomplished. In various quite nooks and corners I had the beginnings

of all sorts of industries under way -- nuclei of future vast

factories, the iron and steel missionaries of my future civilization.

In these were gathered together ... I was training a crowd of ignorant

folk in to experts -- experts in every sort of handiwork and

scientific calling. "nurseries..." "teacher factory"

65: loyalty to one's country. whyfor?

*** now need something better -- some kind of conclusion... tyranny and
technology.
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: now-need-something-better-some-kind-of-conclusion...-tyranny-and-technology.
    :END:

so in here look for e.g. some moreal lesson about technology and reason.
then compare us and europe from the yankee's eye. in what is Europe's
moral degeneracy constituted?

failure to progress

something like that

need a ssharper analysis...

SO: world battle btwn yankee pluck and Euopean convervatism. Yankee
engineering, like Taylorism, as rational reconstruction of social
orxcer. But it fails. Why?

Taylorism, scientific management

Amerikanismus

interchangeable parts

Yankee Engineer

 Fooucault, ‘combination' of partsL Latour, combijnation of immutable
mobiles; move on towards factory work, standards, war.
* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Action at a Distance/centres of calculation/imperial science


Add stuff about apprehension of the world as a whole

** I. Intro

One of the most important problems in the history of science is that of characterizing the power of science to transform the social world. As Bruno Latour points out in /Science In Action/, the most common account of science, as an intellectual activity /free/ from social constraints, leads easily to a sort of paradox or magical effect. The scientist sits in ‘his' lab, entirely disconnected from the outside world, and makes one discovery after the other; and /magically/, those discoveries /apply/ to the outside world, and wreak what appear to be /necessary and inevitable/ effects on the organization of society.

- first explanation is that scientist discovers universal natural laws, so application outside of lab is necessary.

- universal knowledge contrasted with pre-scientific, particularlist ‘local' knowledge.

- but, a, closer examination shows readily that these laws don't apply everywhere unproblematically,

- b, this explanation also doesn't account for full range of science's effects.

According to Latour, a main part of the power of science is /action at a distance/. Science, and technology, are many things, but one fundamental aspect of scientific accomplishment is to effect a new ordering of space and time, so that, first, the scientist gathers the whole world into the laboratory, and second, the scientist sends the laboratory out into the world.

What I want to do today is not so much defend this story as a general model of /how science must work/ (though I think it has certain merits alongside its numerous flaws) -- but, rather, to think about how the model might help us understand the relation between science and possibly the most important political development of the nineteenth century, namely, empire.

** II. Centres of Calculation

Start with some well-established features of scientific activity

- practiced by people living in social contexts, not by ethereal machines.

- scientists connected to each other by a number of concrete ties: disciplinary (educational); institutional (funding, immediate work environment); citational.

- relevance of last category should become clear soon when we talk about the importance of /translations/.

*** Networks

Early scientific networks relatively informal, originating as forms of sociability between like-minded individuals, e.g. Royal Society in 17^{th} century England, Lycean Academy in Italy, various ‘republics of Letters' in 18^{th} century, e.g. among naturalists who write exhaustively to each other.

- late 18^{th} century, early nineteenth, proliferation of such societies and also perhaps somewhat more impressively, proliferation of /journals/ which start more or less as open letters exchanged between colleagues, but which become tools that organize a framework of emerging scientific disciplines.

- probably best-studied example of a c.19 scientific network is the one Darwin participates in in mid-century Britain. Charles Lyell, Charles Darwin, TH Huxley, Robert Murchison, along with many others, were bound together by concrete ties made manifest in their vast correspondence with one another, and also by the ways in which specimens were exchanged (not) freely between them.

- being in a network did not mean that they all agreed with one another on everything, though, e.g., the network around Lyell and the Atheneum Club was composed almost exclusively of Uniformitarians).

- but it does mean that their work was strengthened through mutual citation: these natural philosophers /enrolled/ each others' findings in order to make their arguments more convincing

- not a critique, but a description!!

- both /theoretical content of their work/ and /its capacity to convince other people/ hard to imagine without this network.

- Other examples from our reading): Thomson-Tait_Joule-Tomson; Thomson-Maxwell-Heaviside-Rayleigh; Helmholtz, Siemens, & Prussian military engineers, industrialists; (Hooker and collectors at Kew gardens. )

- sometimes these networks form competing blocs in antagonist relation to each other -- as, e.g., when Siemens & Maxwell compete over the value of the Ohm & the embodiment of the standard, or when British field theory mobilizes against German action-at-a-distance formulations, or when Lyell, Grant & others mobilize against transformism in the 1840's. At other times, the same actors may support each other.

- nonetheless, there are good reasons to treat the networks as relatively coherent and stable objects with /explanatory power/ -- e.g., membership in the Atheneum Club ends up being pretty good predictor for conversion to Darwinian transformism in 1860's.

- In a rapidly-changing world, thesee networks compete to become /indeispensable. /E.g., when Lyell sets out in 1820's, /geology /does not exist as a science: there's no funding source, no audience, no prestige. Lyell's task, in writing the /Principles of Geology/, in organizing scientific societies, in pursuing his career in general, is to /enlist allies/ among the reading public, the officials of the state, private corporations, University scholars, amateur rockhunters, by /convincing them that their interests are served by his vision of society/. At beginning of century, no one is convinced; at end of century, everyone knows that geology is indispensable for predicting mineral deposits, sorting your rock collections, dating fossils (hence classifying organisms), making sense of the history of the world, ordering knowledge. It becomes something /none of the principals can do without,/, and so it's graually institutionalized, very successfully, in its present form.

*** Centralization.

- these networks, and scientific networks in general, aren't homogeneous, but /structured/. that is, they have ‘centres' and ‘peripheries', nodes of greater and lesser importance.

- Charles Lyell & amateur rockhunters in Devonshire, in Wisconsin, in India, are all part of a network of uniformitarian geology; but they don't all exercise similar degrees of control over the network, they're not interchangeable. (Not a ‘distributed network' like the Internet was supposed to be).

- how does this asymmetry come about?

- answer 1: accumulation of status (legitimate or illegitimate) through publication of works, etc.

- but question: how is this status accumulated?

- -In a sense, this is q. Latour wants to answer with his idea of ‘centres of calculation' (or at least, what I want to use L to answer)

- is there something about science that makes this asymmetry /inherent/ to its practice? (or at least, hard to avoid)

*** Collecting the World

- Latour's ex: exploration of East Pacific in 18^{th} century by Lapérouse. Lapérouse wants to know the extent of the landmass called ‘Sakharin'. Is it an island or a peninsula? How big is it? What's its position relative to the well-known Kamtchtka Peninsula, South of the Bering Strait?

- inhabitants of the island draw Lapérouse a map on the notebook, mark out the scale.

- meanwhile, Lapérouse gathers as much information as possible on the customs of the natives; then, in a hurry, departs to continue its voyage.

- Lapérouse never makes it back home, but the notebook does. In Versailles, the markings in the notebook are integrated with thousands more such pieces of paper, which have arrived at Versailles from all over the world, and assembled into maps and atlases of physical and human geography.

- next ship to come to Sakharin from Europe /sees it for the second time/, not the first.

- has already explored the island via inscriptions made & published at Versailles.

- Latour says, somewhat disturbingly: first, the natives were /stronger/ than the Europeans: their knowledge ran deeper, was more reliable; and the mutual ignorance of each others' cultures was equitable; later on, relevant parts of local knowledge have been accumulated & stored in Europe, but same thing has not (apparently) happened at Sakharin.

- ‘gaining knowledge' is intimately linked to, even defined by, this /accumulation at the centre/. “Question: how to act at a distance on unfamiliar events, places, and people? Answer: by /somehow/ bringing home these events, places and people.” (223)

- immutable mobiles;

  - make mobiles /stable;/
  - make them /combinable/.

- Phenomena themselves /cannot,/ however, actually be brought back to the
centre. cf. geology. (big rocks). cf. Darwin's specimens (only transport
dead, preserved). Even if they can be brought back, if the
transportation mechanism is any good, then rapidly becomes too much.

- need additional translation mechanisms. turn into representations
(drawings, lists of characteristics; then tallies of characteristics;
then perhaps equations;

- Darwin as organizational genius.

- ‘avalanche of numbers' as a way to /condense/ the world into the
State-bureaucratic apparatus;statistics as a means of rendering them
manageable

- also need /instruments/: mechanisms that translate phenomena into
/calibrated measurements/. So e.g., Lapérouse's notes rendered
immeasurably more powerful by virtue of being tallied with Latitude
measurements made by astrolabe.

- quest for Longitude

- This process of translation is what Latour calls ‘the mobilization of
the world.' Through ingeniously-devised methods of translation, the
/world / isbrought into the laboratory, where it can be further
manipulated

- cf. example of scale-model of dam.

- Once these immutable mobiles are brought into the lab, they can be
/combined/ with each other, e.g. to make the complete map of the world
or the pacific that late 18^{th} century navigators sailed with.

- but more powerful combinations also possible. cf. 18^{th} century maps
vs. GIS: latitude + longitude + core samples + statistical data re:
associations btwn core samples and mineral/fossil fuel deposits

+ economic data about an oil company

+ data re: movements of stock market

+ accumulated data re: political & social conditions in an area

all, taken together, give enormously /flexible/ range of knowledge.

- abstraction and combination are neither neutral nor passive: they are /interested/, as we said about intelligence, statistics in general; but they also /are generative/ -- they show relationships that were invisible before, and in some cases bring new phenomena into existence.

Extension into the world (metrology)

Scientific findings are generated (on this account) by /bringing the
world into the lab/ mobilization of the world).

they are made relevant /by bringing the lab into the world./

- “still more fragile than termites, facts and machines can travel along
extended galleries, but they cannot survive one minute in this famous
and mythical ‘out-thereness' so vaunted by philosophers of science.”
(248)

- at any moment, ‘universal' knowledge faces the danger of being
‘precipitously localized' by unexpected events.

- verification of scientific theories outside the lab always involved a
/reconstruction of social order/.

- e.g., verify theories of disease by /transforming hospital into n
extension of the laboratory/.

- this is accomplished through the use of instruments: constructed in the
lab, then manufactured, then distributed along the arteries of the
network, and deployed as tools of /metrology/.

- like airplanes, facts need /landing strips/ to ensure their safe
delivery out into the outside world.

- so veracity of scientific claims is co-extensive with the network which
carries and supports those facts. when the network breaks down, so does
the fact.

- this latter reveals ‘science' as an enterprise which cannot be removed
from its concrete entanglement with other parts of culture and economy.

- ‘technoscience' takes place in the endless process of translation and
calibraiton which is metrology.

** III. Some Centres of Calculation and the Knowledge they Generate

Hard /not/ to present this as a general theory of science. Some things
to note in Latour:

- interesting selection of metaphors, e.g., of /domination/, of
/accumulation/, of /violence, /of /empire/. All of these somewhat
disturbing. Also maybe not all metaphors.

- in particular, quite high preponderance of examples from age of
imperialism. Indeed, imperial enterprise seems to be both a /model/ for
science and a big chunk of what science does in c. 19.

- so in second hour want to give a few examples of things that might be
thought of as imperial science.

*** Kew Gardens

The Gardens beside Kew Observatory were founded in 18^{th} century as a
private pleasure garden or the British royal family. Over the course of
the 19^{th} century, they were transformed into the single most
important centre of botanical learning in the world.

Sir Joseph Banks (1743-1820), Sir William Hooker (1785-1865) and Sir
Joseph Dalton Hooker (1817-1911) effected this transformation.

- all 3 as colonial explorers -- e.g. banks, who sailed with Captain
Cook. their interest in botany is thus /absolutely conditioned by/ the
imperial enterprise

- botany is interesting in large part b/c the empire opens up new vistas
of nature.

- their importance, though, has less to do with their /travels/ than with
their management/ of other collectors, who worked for them either
directly (sent on expeditions) or /indirectly (sent in specimens
freelance).

- so they coordinated a sort of empire themselves.

- tensions btwn these collectors and the centre -- lousy pay, low status.

- Kew becomes necessary point of passage for identification of new
species, since don'tk now if something's new until you compare it with
zillions of other plants, which (a) isn't possible for one indifvidual
to do anyway, (b) can only be done in the presence of actual specimens
(preserved) of these other plants.

- this enterprise needs funding, which is provided by gov't bc of central
importance of botany to commerce. (rubber, e.g.: can it be cultivated
elsewhere in Empire?).

- establishment of other colonial gardens on the model of Kew: monuments
to Emire, or /replications of centre/ which /allow the centre to
travel/. When these become centres of learning in their own right which
compete with Kew for knowledge and centrality, is this /success/ or
/failure/ of Kew's imperial project?

*** Collecting People

Not only plant specimens were collected, e.g. Darwin collected animals.

in late cc. 19, growing interest in human diversity leads to collection
and display of native peoples. Way of generating knowledge about racial
differences, cultural constants and variabls.

- discourse of authenticity.

- here obviously travels in tandem with empire, but also with imperialist
interests, e.g., in Germany, where such displays sponsored by
Imperialist associations.

- again, creation of Centres of Calculatin, e.g. in Berlin
Anthropological Society, which then authorizes displays pof peoples,
disseminaiton of knowledge, and colonial policies.

*** Telegraphy

Readings make clear how field theory travelled with the telegr\aph.
field theory needed underwater telegraphy to be convincing;

- underwater telegraphy needed field theory to make sense of what was
going on.

- telegraphy, in turn, driven explicitly by worries about colonial
administration.

- infratructure, funding, science all come together under one heading
here.

** Science in the Colonies

1 -- return to question of indigenous knowledge: is ‘local knowledge'
gobbled up and replaced by ‘universal knowledge'? Or is there a more
complex process of exchange?

2 -- How does Science move within colonies?

how is science represented to public inside the colonies (cf. colonial
gardens in Guyana, elsewhere; museums referred to in Gupta reading).

- related to Great Expositions of late c. 19: spectacle of science

- but think of this in terms of mobilization of resources, extension of
networks, , etc: noe recourse to /either/ natore /or/ society as an
explanatory force.

but also, what role does science play in viswion of postcolonial
society?

(Part 2: 3 examples: Kew Gardens; telegraphy; rep of science in colonial
society)

** COMMENT IV. Action at at Distance today (this week)

Departing slightly from the schedule, think about applying this notion
to the events that re about to unfold in Iraq.

- U.S. military is one giant technoscientific enterprise, comprising
large numbers of economic, political, technical, scientific interests.

- How does the military seek to control the world?

- with science, first answer is ‘through dissemination of true knowledge”
- - world automatically responds.

- with military strategy: “through the application of overwhelming force”
- - world just responds.

- both answers prima facie plausible, both also unsatisfactory. Science
generates true knowledge: but how does it generate it? US military
generates overwhelming force: but how does it generate it?

- answer: by extending the laboratory. Laboratory is a controlled
environment in which factors that interfere with interpretation of
events are removed or ‘shielded'.

- US military attempts to do the same with the world as a whole.

- most obvious way in which this is so: GPS satellites turn simple radio
receivers into extreme-precision instruments. This technosocial network,
which includes the satellites themselves, the computer software that
encrypts the signals, the earth-bound hardware that runs that software,
the economic interests of the companies that make all these components,
the political interests of Pentagon bureaucrats, etc., etc., now extends
over the earth as a whole. But it needn't. In theory, these signals
could be jammed, etc; or a crucial link in the network could refuse to
work within it.

- This is particularly important in this war since 97-98% of the bombs
dropped in the coming weeks will be gps-guided. In Latour's terminology,
/these bombs have been there before/.

- (we have knowledge of something only when we've seen it before)

- But this is by no means the only ex of network-dependence of US military allies. in long run, depends on persuading other interests that  their interests are aligned with those of the US military, and enrolling their support -- not necessarily on the ground, but of it. Network is larger than it looks.

- Power of networks is in their heterogeneity and dispersion. But thisalso entails their /flexibility/ and /impermanence/. In the long run, there are always opportunities to move the center /to the periphery/, and it is always possible that /the network may break down/ when allies refuse to berolle.d

# - in the short run, it's unlikely that anything can stop the US-led war which is about to unfold. But in the long-run, consistent, principled resistance to a unilateral world hegemony is not only possible, but necessary.

(just as might be sceptical of claim that science ‘subdues' local knowledge, should probably also be sceptical of claim that military ‘subdues' the enemy'. Both assertions rest on vague and misleading definitions -- and in case of war, problem is even more urgent than in science, since it mislabels the ‘enemy' as a person or group of people, when(a) existence of enem y überhaupt is complex matter open to debate, and (b) if there is an enemy, it's something far more complicated.

* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Degeneration (rough notes only!!!)

Degeneration:

Age of the Sun's Heat:

--> hypothesis of gradual running down of the world. Difficulty of
assigning causality, but mass appeal of Kelvin's hypothesis.

Evolution: Eugenics: law of survivial of fittest abrogated. Replacement
with human-assisted evolution.

Effects odf modernity: unnatrual conditions lead to progressive physical
and moral degeneration.

Lombroso: 1835-?

1858 grads med school

1859-65: mil doctor

marries phrenology & craniometry to evolution of races.

see this kindo f public health disorder as a /political/ problem --
howto rewsore bodfy politic. Max Nordau: 1849-1923. Doctor and
journalist.

defaying brain centers. lack discipline. aesthetic prevails over the
useful.

irony of jewish prophets of degeneration laying groundwork for nazi
science.

* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Normalcy and Statistical Persons

WEEK 17

The idea of normalcy is so pervasive in our thinking that it's difficult to imagine what it would be like to do without the category. Something important to realize is that even those who defy normalcy opoerate within its parameters. In the guiding questions for this week, I mentioned the bumper sticker from the 1980's, “Why be Normal”, a slogan which I associate vaguely & without evidence with Punk & associated cultural phenomena. What does this slogan exhort us to do? To defy the pressure of normalcy, to deviate from what's expected, to emancipate yourself from inner slavery (to quote from an altogether different subgenre of pop music). The slogan is quirky, has a certain humour to it, but also carries a bitter edge, a reference to the oppressive force of normalcy.

And so it sees at first glance that, while normalcy is a powerful force,we can at least get away from it through an act of (say) humourous defiance).

But on further reflection, it's not as easy as it looks. Even the most radical version of anti-normal activity still /takes normalcy as its benchmark./ That is, the rebellion against being normal -- from the smallest defiance of convention (wearing inappropriate jewery, ot cutting your hair right) to the most extravagant (the 2-foot hair-sprayed spiked mohawk, the wholesale adoption of a queer S&M lifestyle, retreat into squats or Utopian communities) -- relies for its forcefulness on a shared understanding of /what normal behaviour is/. Abnormal behaviour always refers back to what's normal, so in this respect the principle of the norm governs even the defiance of the norm.

I harp on this point because, as Leonard Davis suggests in his essay, the use of the 'norm' as a way of categorizing human differences is neither universal nor even an especially ancient technique. While it's hard to imagine a human society that doesn't have some system of classifying human differences, the idea of 'normalcy' is quite specific to the modern era. Even as late as the eighteenth century, one could be mad, sane, sinful, sintly, grotesque, beautiful, but not /normal/. The idea of normalcy with its quite specific connotations is a nineteenth century innovation. Pior to the first half of the nineteenth century, the term “normal” was much more closely related to its etymological roots, denoting /perpendicularity/, as in the mathematical expression “draw a normal line”. From this we get the term “norm”, referring to a carpenter's tool for drawing perpendicular lines (now called a carpenter's square).

From this term we get the idea of a norm as a standard, e.g.,

* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): norme
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: norme
  :END:

*norme.* .

- *1635* J. Hayward tr. /Biondi's Banish'd Virg./ 169 These conditions
  which serve for a norme and a patterne..to forme their lives and
  actions by.
- *1649* G. Daniel /Trinarch., Hen. IV/, xxv, There is a Line Springs
  from All humane Actions to informe A nearer Way then by the written
  Norme.

So the “norm”, before the Nineteenth century, already /is/ “normative”; but it refers to a rule or line that one must follow. So the /law , for instance, is a norm. /But the lawe is not normal, the person is not normal, though a line can be, again in the sense of perpendicular. This is still quite a distance from the idea we have of normalcy, or normality. For us, to be normal is /to be like others/*. What is “normal” is not what is /ideal/, but what is /ordinary/.

If we look, say, at France, we can see that this conception is certai1ly not in place in 1794, fwhen the Revolutionary regime founds the /École Normale Supérieure/, the Higher Normal School, for the eeducation of teachers. sThe graduates of the École Normale Sup will bem ade into right-thinkers; but they will certainly /not/ be made orfdinary (instead, they'l be made Superieure, extraordinary). On the other hand, when the physiologist Claude Bernard publishes his /Leçonssur les propriétés physioloigiques et les altérations pathologiques des liquides de l'organisme/, in 1859, or still more when he publishes the epoch-making /Leçons Sur le diabète et la glycogenèse animale /in 1876, he uses the term “Norm” in a wsay that begins to make Sense to us.

Bernard is interested in the distinction between what he calls /the normative/ state and the /pathological/ state of the organism. In earlier days -- say in t he 18^{th} century -- medicine had a rather Manichean view of the world, a view which saw /disease/ as an entire\ly /distinct/ state forom health. Think of this as a switch: on -- health; off -- disease. Diabetes was a special condition characterrized by strange physiological states; health was simpsle normalcy.

Bernard says: no. a helathy person

* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Statistical Persons
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: statistical-persons
  :END:

Probably most important science-based movement for social change to
arise out of evolutionary thinking is /eugenics/, invented as both a
scientific discipline and a program for social action by Francis Galton.

-science of selective improvement of human race, or ‘all influences that
improve the inborn qualities of a race'

-eugenics became infamous in mid-twentieth century because of its
deployment by the Nazi regime through forced sterilization and
systematic murder. But in the very late nineteenth century, and also in
the early c. 20, eugenics was /extremely/ widely accepted as a
legitimate form of social engineering, and was as popular on the
reforming left as on the dynamic right.

-great success of eugenics was to combine theory of
descent-through-modification, and natural selection (on one hand) with
relatively new /science of statistics/.

In so doing, eugenics deployed notion of /statistical persons/ which was
really emerging simulaneously with eugenics itself.

-it's that latter concept I want to cover today; eugenics itself
mentioned only obliquely.

** Short History of Statistics
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: short-history-of-statistics
   :END:

The field that we know as ‘probability and statistics' emerged only in
the nineteenth century, even if phiosophical investigations of /chance/,
on the one hand, and /reliably replicable patterns of events,/ on the
other hand, extend back to antiquity.

-so, e.g, 18^{th} century attempts to figure out whether there are laws
that govern gambling, the most famous such being Pascal's Wager, which
frames belief in God as a bet one makes with oneself; and also 18^{th}
century efforts to catalog the capacities of natural states, known as
‘statistics' -- the numbers that characterize a state.

-in c. 19, these two fields of investigation come together especially
around the scientific understanding of human beings. the /regularity/ of
human deviations is powerfully demonstrated by the ‘avalanche of
numbers' that arises in early c. 19; through regularity,older ideas of,
e.g., /an essential underlying human nature/, on the one hand, and /an
ideal of human perfection/, on the other hand, are increasingly replaced
by the idea of the /norm. /

(1)norm as hero of our lecture: giant success story.

(2)somewhat more abstractly and tangentially: emergence at end of c. 19,
of new kind of /objective knowledge/ (Hacking): strictly deterministic
universe replaced by (social and, eventually, physical) universe in
which irreducible randomness could nonetheless by rendered intelligible,
predictable, lawlike, and manageable -- in Scott's terminology,
/legible/.

Will have to leave out big chunks of the story, so don't take this
lecture as authoritative.

** 
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: section
   :END:

*** Avalanche of printed numbers
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: avalanche-of-printed-numbers
    :END:

At the beginning of the century, and especially as the Napoleonic Era
came to a close, massive increase in numbers of numbers, also in their
publicity.

-These grew in a dialectic relationship with techniques for analysing,
and managing those numbers.

-we'll see in a moment how ‘statistics' remained importantly tied to
/the state. /

** Large Numbers and Regularity
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: large-numbers-and-regularity
   :END:

** 
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: section-1
   :END:

** Arbuthnot
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: arbuthnot
   :END:

1710: John Arbuthnot, physician to Queen Anne, publishes ‘An Argument
for Divine /Providence, Taken From the Constant Regularity Observ'd in
the Births of Both Sexes/. Using records of births in London recorded
over the previous 82 years, Arbuthnot notes a slight predominance of
male births over female in every single year.

If the chance of a baby being male were determined, e.g., by a coin
toss, then then probability that male births outstrip female in every
single one of these years would be vanishingly small.

 in fact, Arbuthnot argues, human species must be so constituted as to
give rise to more male than female babies.

-but we need an equal number

-so why more males? b/c males go off to war, other dangerous tasks.

-God /compensates /for this condition by establishing slight
differential.

-For Arbuthnot, and for thei ncreasing number of statisticians who came
after him in c. 18, /regularity/ of such ‘statistical' numbers were
proof of /divine wisdom and planning/ (in much the same way that the
good design of organisms was ‘natural theological' proof of organisms'
Divine Design).

-/both/ stories come unravelled at mid-nineteenth-century.

/Quetelet/.

As Porter quite masterfully outlines, it is largely through the work of
Belgian Adolphe Quetelet that this unravelling is accomplished. Quetelet
(1796-1874) first trained as a mathematician in Brussels, then as an
astronomer in France, and established an observatory in Brussels in the
early 1820's. As an astronomer, he was aware of the error-checking
techniques by which multiple observations taken by different observers
were averaged to find the ‘true' position of a celestial body

(later developed into ‘personal equastion, cf. Wolff, Airy)

In 1830, following the revolution which established Belgium as an
independent state (sep. from Nethernlands), Quetelet turned
definitivelyfrom astronomy to the study of social statistics, though he
was consistent throughout his career in tying social order back to
celestial order.

As Porter notes, a key moment actually comes before Quetelet's main
involvement with statistics.

1829: notes with shock the ‘frightening regularity with which the same
crimes are reproduced' in the records of criminal activity published by
French government

-why so shocking?

-earlier regularity thought of as divine providence. But could there be
divine providence /and planning/ in the regularity of /crime/?

-criminal acts had hitherto been seen as

(1) capricious and irrational -- therefore not subject to lawlike
analysis. /they were the opposite of regularity/,

(2) acts of /free will/, however twisted -- hence, again, not subject to
the same laws as natural pheomena, and most certainly not the product of
Divine Providence.

If criminal activity is regular, then it must reveal something other
than Divine Providence. But what, and how?

step one: see the statistical regularities: that so many murders per
capita will always be committed, that the same proportion will be
committed with knoves, ropes, guns, & blunt objects, year to year, in a
wretched cycle;  as /social/ facts.

-/individual/ crimes are /physical/ facts. As /individual/ crimes, they
might be generated by passions, even by free will.

-but as /collective, /social facts, /they reveal something more/: the
collective human nature.

step two: /l'homme moyen/. indeed, seen as collective facts, crime
statistics tell us, not about /criminals/ per se, but about /the nature
of the collective/.

-Quetelet calls this collective structure /l'homme moyen,/ the average
man.

-If 1 out of 1000 Frenchmen will commit a murder in the course of his


-so Q. uses the avalanche of numbers to divine the character of /a
collective man, in which all members of the society are somehow
implicated./

-The existence of this ‘collective' due to constancy of social causes,
which always produce same effects.

-two things to note about homme moyen: (1) rise of a competitor for
‘human nature' -- a /collective representation of human capacities/; (2)
responsibility for crime shunted away from /individual/ to /collective/,
and in at least a small part,to /the representative of the collective,
namely, the State. /

-so Quetelet's vision of social statistics is one which almost
necessarily implies the extension of a regulatory apparatus into
increasingly broad areas of human life (even if Q doesn't himself
delineate the causes at work here).

-Statistics as a /rigorous science/ which can guide the development of
appropriate governance. No longer just collection of numbers, but a
decriptive and also /predictive/ science (cf. quote re: life expectancy)
which can /identify definitively/ the appropriate points for the
intervention of the state into society.

-crime is initial impetus, but not the only one: all kinds of medical
statistics, longevity, disease prevalance, deformities; also e.g.
average heitghts, weights, etc.

--what had been /error/ becomes /variation /; what had been /truth/
becomes /norm. /

Normal and Pathological

Reception of Quetelet's theory heavily influenced by an idea developing
in medicine and moving from med into social theory: the idea of the
norm. here need to take a bit of a detour into medical history.

-/study of pathology/ obviously central to medicine from moment 1.

-but question as to whether pathologies /radically different / from
healthy state has usually been an open one. Put simply, this is the
question:

-are diseases, deformities, and other /pathologies/ the result of a
foreign principle that invades the body (on the one hand) or the absence
of some necessary principle of health (on the other)? Or, conversely,
are pathologies /the result of perfectly normal processes which have
simply /run out of control/? /

-Nineteenth century was highpoint of /second/ view. And most especially,
in c. 19 /investigation of pathologies/ /becomes a proxy for
investigation of the norm. /

3 main figures: physiologst fjv Broussais, who first stted this ‘law of
variability'; CB, who demonstrated it most conclusively; and August
Comte, who extended the principle to study of social phenomena.

/Claude Bernard: /pathologies as deviations from the norm. (1813-1878)

Diabetes as key model. Raging debate over status of /glycemia, presence
of sugars in blood/. Known to exist in diabetics, and to pass from blood
into urine (glycosurea). Question: is this a wholly patholgical
phenomenon? Or a /variation from the norm/?

Bernard, 1877:

There is only one glycemia, it is constant, permanent, both during
diabetes and outside that morbid state. Only it has degreesÖ glycemia
below 3 to 4% does not lead to glycosuria; but above that level
glycosuria results... It is impossible to perceive the transition from
the normal to the pathological state, and no problem shows better than
diabetes the intimate fusion of physiology and pathology. (Canguilhem,
70)

cf an opposing view:

 The diabetic state cannot be attributed to the overintensification of a
physiological operation which does not exist... it is impossible to
regard diabetes as the overintensification of a regular operation: it is
the expression of an operation completely foreign to normal life. This
operation is in itself the essence of the disease. (71)

And finally, one last quote:

Health and disease are not 2 essentially diffeent modes as the ancient
physicians believed and some practicioners still believe. They should
not be made into distinct principles, entities which fight over the
living organism and make it the theater of their contest... In reality,
between these two modes of being, there are only differences of degree:
exaggeration, disproportion, discordance of normal phenomena constitute
the diseases state. There is no case where disease would have produced
new conditions, a complete change of scene, some new and special
products. (71)

/once this principle is established, possible to use investigation of
pathology as a substitute for lab experimentation, as a way to
investigate nature of normal human organism. /

If this view is most explicitly and fully developed in work of CB, then
it is made most general in philoosphical works of August Comte, the
founder of positivist philosophy and one-time pupil of St-Simon.

-Comte argued famously that, just as /biological/ pathologies were the
result of variations from the normal biological state, so /social/ and
/political/ pathologies were the result of variations from the
social/political/moral norm.

-To correct deviations, one had to strive to reaffirm the norm.

So when combine Quetelet with Bernard, get ‘the norm' replacing ‘human
nature' as a /desirable /state which needs to be identified, analyzed,
and eventually, /accomplished/ (brought about).

-all phenomena are characterized by a /continuous variation/ or
/deviance/ from the norm, which needs to be /minimized/ if the social
organism is to remain healthy.

/Francis Galton/ (1822-1911)

Darwin's brash younger cousin Francis Galton was Charles' biggest fan.
an obsessive counter and measurer, Galton was very rapidly intrigued by
thei mplications of his cousin's theory for the organization of human
society.

-As we discussed at beginning of class, Darwinian descent with
modification does not guarantee a permanent upwards progress. We are
only perfect with respect to the immediate selective pressures that act
upon us.

-when hose selective forces change, so does the nature of our
‘perfection'

-so if we have independent notions of perfection, the ‘progress' we make
might look to us, rather, like /degeneration. /

-the /norm/ in this case might not be the /goal towards which we should
strive, /but /rather /the embodiment of mediocrity. So no /a priori/
positive valuation of normalcy.

-Galton wants to change the selective pressures acting on human race,
and thus gradually pust the race towards /excellence/.

-first model trait is /height/.

-but focus quickly settles on /intelligence/, understood to vary in
precisely the binomial manner that height does.

-thus in eugenics /norm/ ceases to be the ideal towards which one
streives.

-yet it continues to exercise a fundamental organizing and ‘normative'
force. No longer want to revert to the norm; but get a continuous
variation which varies from /worse than normal/ to /better than norm/.
So the norm /continues to arbitrate btwn ‘is' and ‘ought'/, as Hacking
says.

-so all versions of ‘normal' represent a radical innovation in
evaluation of variation, which we unavoidably live with today, whatevr
its vicissitudes.

(reification of the norm)

3 applications

anthropometry and le systeme Bertillon.

Alphonse Bertillon (1853-1914), French civil servant and son/brother of
physiians. While working as chief of identification for PARIS police
prefecture, developed ‘biometric' system of identification.

Problem: increasing amount of data; no reliable indicators with which to
sort through this data.

-criminals rarely carried identification papers on their persons, so
/identification / of culprit depended entir ely on them givng their
names. but criminals not on average, that stupid.

-problem of surveillance, management, of a recidivist population (the
population F. refers to in D&P).

-can one imake the bodies of criminals speak for themselves?

 yes! by using statistical principle that population /varies/.

-how it works: multiple measurements., divided into categories, etc.

-information management technology plus system of training and
calibrated instruments.

-why it's better than fingerprints: straightforward, obvious
classificatory system.

(note absence of a normative norm)

NOTE: CF THE SERIAL KILLER, *PROFILING*, and the statistical method of
sorting through criminality.

** Disability
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: disability
   :END:

Notion of diability depends on (1) idea of continuous variation, and (2)
deployment of normative idea of normlcy.

*cf. grotesque: radical alterity. disability not like that*;

-instead, disability is part of spectrum of human possibility. so
wonders, monsters, very different form the disabled

-but inclusion within category ‘human' ain't good enough (so pretty far
from Enlightenment vision of humanity as a unity). Instead, variation
from the nborm can be measured and used as a measure of fitness, as a
way to set disabled off from desired humanity.



* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Review of normaslcy and segue to hysteria.

 Last week, had we had lecture, we would have discussed the idea of
/normalcy/ and its relation to statistial reasoning. There are several
interrelated ideas which need unravelling here, but which nonetheless
fundamentally have to be understood in relation to each other. They are:

-The norm as a guide, a rule, a principle. Ancient idea of norm.

-The norm as an ideal, as something to strive for, as something which
must be fostered and cared for.

-The norm as mediocrity, as danger of degeneration.

(we carry both these latter 2 idea of normalcy faround with us all the
ttime)...

both ocnditioned by:

-The rise of statistical thinking, the relation between individual and
mass, the definition of an individual as a cell within an n-dimensional
grid whose axes are determined by the 'avalanche of numbers'

Idea of normalcy, so powerful today, did not exist as we know it 200
years ago. Instead, other ways of categorizing human difference ruled:
e.g., distinction btwn “grotesque” and ordinary, btwn holy and sinful,
btwn mad and sane.

The rise of normalcy is fundamentally related to the “avalanche of
printed numbers”, the sudden surge in the production of quantitative
data of all kinds which begins in the Napoleonic Era and continues to
grow unabated to this day. It is above all the sense that phenomena of
all kinds obey the “laws of large numbers” -- the rules of statistics --
that things as diverse ass the human birth rate, the rate of criminal
activity, the number of dead letters arriving at the central post office
every month -- display a regularity as ffixed and constant as the
rotation of the heavens ----- it is this sensee that loes behind the
power of the norm in our day. The statistical norm is the living proof
of the laws that govern capricious fate, and also of the laws that
govern human action and ddesire. To ben ormal -- or to avoid or cry out
against normalcy -- is to participate in a lived relationship to the
collective of all other citizens, men, homosezxuals, humans, or
hairdressers (pick your category!). Normalcy can be an oporessive force
(to be forced to be normal) or an emancipatory one (to assert that e.g.
one's sexual preference is itself normal); no matter what form it takes,
it is the sinequa non of our experience of ourselves and also of the
world.

In seciton last week we spoke less than I had wished about the
importance of statistical reasoning, which goes hand in hand with the
idea of the norm but which needn't always make reference to it. Perhaps
the most extraordinary and quotidian expression of statistical reasoning
is the tendency to understand all personal and collective decisions in
terms of risks. What are the cnhances that I”'ll get hit by a car today?
Statistically speaking, which subway route gets me home the quickest?
What are the chances I'll make itt hrough this semester without going
crazy? These (often more orl ess subliminal) questions we ask ourselves
are relics of the nineteenth century, a part of our inheritance from
thinmkers like Quetelet and Bertillon.

Statistics itself developed handi n glove with the expansion of the
State. Its name bears witness to this fact. ; but its reach went beyond
the purely political to encompass all aspects of scientific inquiry
thatm ight have relevance for State planning & welfare. Combining with
the techniqueso f “error analysis” in the experimental sciences, (& also
& especially astronomy) statistics became a powerful scientific force
over the course ofh te nineteenth century; and though its rise began, in
many ways, with the relatively unsophisticated analyses of Adolphe
Quertelet, it was not long before quite brilliant mathematicians began
to formulate increasingly ocmplex tools for statistical analysis of data
of all kinds.

Interestingly, the idea of the norm did not always mesh
unproblematically with statisitcal reasons, not everywhere in the mid
nineteenth cnetury. I want to begin to work my way towards hysteria by
discussing one case where the two ideas were seen to be fundamentally
opposed to each other. ; this will, I hope, shed some light on the
unevenness of the transition to statistical reason, and give an idea of
the place of normalcy in /medical/ practice in this period.

/Claude Bernard: /pathologies as deviations from the norm. (1813-1878)

Diabetes as key model. Raging debate over status of /glycemia, presence
of sugars in blood/. Known to exist in diabetics, and to pass from blood
into urine (glycosurea). Question: is this a wholly patholgical
phenomenon? Or a /variation from the norm/?

Bernard, 1877:

There is only one glycemia, it is constant, permanent, both during
diabetes and outside that morbid state. Only it has degreesÖ glycemia
below 3 to 4% does not lead to glycosuria; but above that level
glycosuria results... It is impossible to perceive the transition from
the normal to the pathological state, and no problem shows better than
diabetes the intimate fusion of physiology and pathology. (Canguilhem,
70)

cf an opposing view:

 The diabetic state cannot be attributed to the overintensification of a
physiological operation which does not exist... it is impossible to
regard diabetes as the overintensification of a regular operation: it is
the expression of an operation completely foreign to normal life. This
operation is in itself the essence of the disease. (71)

And finally, one last quote:

Health and disease are not 2 essentially diffeent modes as the ancient
physicians believed and some practicioners still believe. They should
not be made into distinct principles, entities which fight over the
living organism and make it the theater of their contest... In reality,
between these two modes of being, there are only differences of degree:
exaggeration, disproportion, discordance of normal phenomena constitute
the diseases state. There is no case where disease would have produced
new conditions, a complete change of scene, some new and special
products. (71)

/once this principle is established, possible to use investigation of
pathology as a substitute for lab experimentation, as a way to
investigate nature of normal human organism. /

What is important for us here is this sense of a continuum along which
normal and abnormal states of being are placed.

-not polar opposites, but continuous variation; for a scientist, see
normal and pathological states as intimately linked to each other.

-Perhaps strangely, Bernard resisteed the use of statistical reasoning
in medical science. An abstraction like “l'homme moyen”, he argued,
fwould never be any good for analysing a concrete case.

The fapparent contradiction here can only be made sensee of by realizing
that Bernard's idea of “normal” was not yet our own; it referred to the
normal or “desired” state of an individual organism, not to the
statistical average. That this idea is hard to grasp shows that the
triumph of normalcy as we know was not yet complete, even in Paris in
the mid 19^{th} century.

If this view is most explicitly and fully developed in work of CB, then
it is made most general in philoosphical works of August Comte, the
founder of positivist philosophy and one-time pupil of St-Simon.

-Comte argued famously that, just as /biological/ pathologies were the
result of variations from the normal biological state, so /social/ and
/political/ pathologies were the result of variations from the
social/political/moral norm.

-To correct deviations, one had to strive to reaffirm the norm.

So when combine Quetelet with Bernard, get ‘the norm' replacing ‘human
nature' as a /desirable /state which needs to be identified, analyzed,
and eventually, /accomplished/ (brought about).

-all phenomena are characterized by a /continuous variation/ or
/deviance/ from the norm, which needs to be /minimized/ if the social
organism is to remain healthy.

From this constellation of theories around normalcy I think it should be
clear that the question of human subjectivity -- of our moral and
intellectual capacities, of our relative merits, of our mental
pahtologies -- was always inherently implicated by the idea of normalcy.
To a certain degree, the rule of individual reason -- autonomy -- was
being replaced by the rule of abstract reason -- statistics.

We see this quite clearly in the study of criminality. Bertillon's
efforts to classify the body of the criminal was matched by attempts to
classify his mind -- Lombroso's being most famous among them.

(cf. CSI, profiling, the Serial Killer)

 With this in mind we turn to study one of the most spectacular medical
phenomena of the 19^{th} cnetury, namely, hysteria.

The fword “hysteria” derives from the Greek fword husteron, or womb; in
the centuries before 18-00 often called “wandering womb, the diagnosis
of hysteria had been around since the time of the Greeks. Hysterics
suffered from a variety of symptoms, including uncontrollable weeping,
sonmambulism, and most impressivley the physical symptoms now known as
“conversion disorders” which included reversible but undeniable physical
ailments of various kinds.

Hysteria had always been associated with the sexual instinct, as its
name implies. Until the mid-nineteenth century it had been a diagnosis
reserved for women only, but in 1859 the French physician Briquet
p8ublished Traité de l'Hysterie in which, among other things, he
extended his analysis to men, hwom he thought constituted about 5% of
the total of hysterics.

In the late part of the cntury hysteria became increasingly associated
with the spectacular and marginal practice of hypnotism and its
associated discipline, “magnetism”. Hysteric re-enactments at Charcot's
Salpetriere most often took an erotic form...

we have 2 main concerns here:

- 

  - what is the status of the hystericla woman? How is she related to
    the normal woman? If the pathological is ocntinuouys with the
    normal, what kinds of special problems does this pose?

2- hysteria was unquesionably the route through fwhich Sigmund Freud and
his collaborators formulated the theory of psychoanalysis, the theory of
abnormal normality par excellence. How does hysteria get him there, fand
how does this theory -- which is, for a wide variety of scholars whose
tastes I do not share, the most esseentiaol hallmark of modenrity -- how
does this theory relate both to our sense of normalcy and to what we've
already learned about the study ofh uman biology in the nineteenth
century?

Sigmund Freud (1856-1939) :

b. the son of bourgeois Vieennese Jews, F. set out on a medical career
only after abandoning promising early researchesi n the physiological
institute of Ernst Bruecke. Starting the curriculum in 1873, he quickly
grew interested in neurological anatomy, published an umber of basic
science papers on the nervous structure of primitive organisms.

-1880's: trip to Charcot's Salpetriere, trnaslation of Charcot's work.
(1885-6)

-cocaine episode...

Josef Breuer (1842-1925)

Anna O = Bertha Pappenheim. Conversion disorders, mutism, historical
reworking of symptoms.

“hysterics suffer mainly form reminisceences. ... etc.

Economic, Dynamic, and Topographical aspects of F's thy. Quota of
energy. Divergence, blockage, release.

thy of defence.

* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Lecture -- used this 2019 --  : "Constructing the Subject"
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: lecture
  :END:

Draws heavily from Danziger, /Constructing the Subject/!!

** Introspection and the Laboratory
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: introspection-and-the-laboratory
   :END:

*** Problem of Introspection before Wundt
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: problem-of-introspection-before-wundt
    :END:

**** Kant
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: kant
     :END:

The problem of the mind's workings is of course an old one, and there are many attempts before the c. 19 to formulate a /philosophical/ theory of mental activity. We've talked about one of the most famous already: Locke's analogy btwn the mind and the Camera Obscura (Mind as a darkened room w/ pinholes through which ideas and sensations pass; clarity achieved by virtue of limitation). IN 19^{th} Century, new ideas surface which bring introspection into proper focus.

Kant: v. concerned with delineating proper subject matters for the
sciences. asks 2 questions:

- is there a discipline concerned with the mind which does not lie within philosopohy? Answer: yes, b/c there's a difference btwn “mental life as it is present to subjective self-awareness” and “general principles in terms of which that life is organized” (Dangziger 20). since 1 is part of empirical world, fthe other is transcendental, only the second is parto f phil.

- can there be a science of the mind? (psychology?) Answers: no. Why? b/c a discipline which takes the “inner sense” as its empirical basis does not make a science; to be science soemthing has to be mathematizable. So he /admits the possibility of a discipline of psychology/, but /devalues that approach./

**** The Mind in Post-Kantian German Philosophy and British Empiricism
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: the-mind-in-post-kantian-german-philosophy-and-british-empiricism
     :END:

Hegelian tradition: /Geist /as transcendental; non-individual substance; thus investigation of individual minds uninteresting

British Empiricism: individual experience the basis of all philosophical reflection; thus introspection is a necessary basis of philosophy and
psychology.

**** Experimental Physiology
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: experimental-physiology
     :END:

Meanwhile, a number of developments in /physiology/ help to create conditions of possibility of a psychological discipline. Physiology itself, whose rise we have discussed, was also a new science branched off in c. 19 from anatomy. Reliance on /functions /rather than /structures/; /experimental tradition/ derives from this shift in emphasis; physiologists also against the separation of volntary andi nvoluntary action. mental entities then also in principle subjectable to experimental investigation.

Lots of interest in /sensory physiology/ -- e.g. Fechner's investigation of vision, Helmholtz' s interest in hearing.

*** Wundt: Impossibility and Necessity of Introspection
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: wundt-impossibility-and-necessity-of-introspection
    :END:

Wilhlem Wundt (1832-1920) took his doctorate at Heidelberg in 1856, in the heyday of experimental physiologiy's great successes. In 1877 he was appointed Professor of Inductive Philosoophy at Leipzig, and established first ever psychological laboratory there in 1879. Wundt aimed to emulate the success of physiologists within a separate discipline devoted to the mind, which he called psychology. Noticable impact of physiological questions when youread his text.

Wundt agreed with Kant (a) that there was a sep discipline called pshycology; (b) that introspection was impossible . Now this gets complicated:

distinction btwn /introspection/ (/Selbstbeobachtung/) and internal perception (/innere Wahrnehmung/).

“not enough to turn your gaze inward and give a systematic acct of your experience -- that's mere reflection, not systematic observation.” Have to manipulate the conditions of internal perception so that they approx. the conditions of external perception. Internal perception yields acceptable data for science oly insofar as experimental conditions permitted a replication ofi nner experience at will.

So for Wundt, legitimate reach of “introspection” is really only “internal perception” in studies from his lab, lots and lots of descriptions e.g. of size, intensity, duration of physical stimuli.

but for Wundt, only osme kinds of phenomena can really be studied experimentally. here's a scale:

sensation, perception

memory, imagery, attentnion

thinking, affect, voluntary activity, social psychiology

havet o be studied some other way.

*** Post-Wundtian Introspection: The Discipline of the Experimenter-Subject
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: post-wundtian-introspection-the-discipline-of-the-experimenter-subject
    :END:

Wundt's disciples tried to extend his experimental method to new objects but were in a quandry as to how to do it. How to make introspection, the illegitimate act, legitimate? answer: by increasing the rigourous standardization and calibration of the investigative mind. Wundt's students Titchener & others tried to extend experimental method to various other submects

The big deal then was to figure out how to standardize the subject. c.f instruments in Coon.

c.f. also discussion of problem of subject/object distinction.

“mechanizing” the subject as a form of self-discipline.

*** Behaviourism: Rejection of Mental Processes as the Object of Psychology
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: behaviourism-rejection-of-mental-processes-as-the-object-of-psychology
    :END:

**** J.d. watson
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: j.d.-watson
     :END:

** Psychology as a Useful Science (Legibility)
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: psychology-as-a-useful-science-legibility
   :END:

*** The Idea of Mental Work
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: the-idea-of-mental-work
    :END:

Hermann Ebbinghaus (1850-1909): memory of nonsense syllables. experiment without introspection. Studies of forgetting and memory of these series of syllables. Work of memorizing, 'strength' of memorized 'image.'

raises question of teleologically-oriented mental processes. If psych processes are a kind of work,, then what kinds of procedures can be delinated to /increase the efficiency of this sort of work?/

-- school psychology: efficiency of learning.
*** COMMENT cool excerpts to ocme back to another time!
Edward Lee Thorndike: American (1874-1949)(consider text from him for
next year!). learning as a fundamental biological category that all
living things have. def'n of teaching:

.. the art of giving and withholding stimuli with the result of
producing or preventing certain responses. In this definition the term
stimulus is used widely for any event which influences a person, - for a
word spoken to him, a look, a sentence which he reads, the air he
breathes, etc., etc. The term response is used for any reaction made by
him, - a new thought, a feeling of interest, a bodily act, any mental or
bodily condition resulting from the stimulus. The aim of the teacher is
to produce desirable and prevent undesirable changes in human beings by
producing and preventing certain responses. The means at the disposal of
the teacher are the stimuli which can be brought to bear upon the pupil,
the teacher's words, gestures, and appearance, the condition and
appliances of the school room, the books to be used and objects to be
seen, and so on through a long list of the things and events which the
teacher can control.

muensterberg 1863-1916

*** The Aggregate Mind (Statistics)
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: the-aggregate-mind-statistics
    :END:

meanwhile: another kind of quantification: statistical reasoning in psychological science.

*** Testing (Intelligence and Aptitude)
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: testing-intelligence-and-aptitude
    :END:

Binet, Terman, Stanford-Binet; use in WWI.

*** An Indispensable Science (Psych, War, Legibility, Normalization)
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: an-indispensable-science-psych-war-legibility-normalization
    :END:
*NOTHING HERE!*
* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): psychoanalysis - -very odd lecture that needs a lot of work!
** Hysteria (*extracted from norm lecture for 2019)
 With this in mind we turn to study one of the most spectacular medical
phenomena of the 19^{th} cnetury, namely, hysteria.

The fword “hysteria” derives from the Greek fword husteron, or womb; in the centuries before 18-00 often called “wandering womb, the diagnosis of hysteria had been around since the time of the Greeks. Hysterics suffered from a variety of symptoms, including uncontrollable weeping, sonmambulism, and most impressivley the physical symptoms now known as “conversion disorders” which included reversible but undeniable physical ailments of various kinds.

Hysteria had always been associated with the sexual instinct, as its name implies. Until the mid-nineteenth century it had been a diagnosis reserved for women only, but in 1859 the French physician Briquet p8ublished Traité de l'Hysterie in which, among other things, he extended his analysis to men, hwom he thought constituted about 5% of the total of hysterics.

In the late part of the cntury hysteria became increasingly associated with the spectacular and marginal practice of hypnotism and its associated discipline, “magnetism”. Hysteric re-enactments at Charcot's Salpetriere most often took an erotic form...

we have 2 main concerns here:

  - what is the status of the hystericla woman? How is she related to the normal woman? If the pathological is ocntinuouys with the normal, what kinds of special problems does this pose?

  - hysteria was unquesionably the route through fwhich Sigmund Freud and his collaborators formulated the theory of psychoanalysis, the theory of abnormal normality par excellence. How does hysteria get him there, ahd how does this theory -- which is, for a wide variety of scholars whose tastes I do not share, the most esseential hallmark of modenrity -- how
does this theory relate both to our sense of normalcy and to what we've already learned about the study ofh uman biology in the nineteenth century?

Sigmund Freud (1856-1939) :

b. the son of bourgeois Vieennese Jews, F. set out on a medical career only after abandoning promising early researchesi n the physiological institute of Ernst Bruecke. Starting the curriculum in 1873, he quickly grew interested in neurological anatomy, published an umber of basic science papers on the nervous structure of primitive organisms.

-1880's: trip to Charcot's Salpetriere, trnaslation of Charcot's work.
(1885-6)

-cocaine episode...

Josef Breuer (1842-1925)

Anna O = Bertha Pappenheim. Conversion disorders, mutism, historical
reworking of symptoms.

“hysterics suffer mainly form reminisceences. ... etc.

Economic, Dynamic, and Topographical aspects of F's thy. Quota of
energy. Divergence, blockage, release.

thy of defence.

** Norms: this stuff is in many places! 
18: Hysteria &c.

Review of normaslcy and segue to hysteria.

 Last week, had we had lecture, we would have discussed the idea of /normalcy/ and its relation to statistial reasoning. There are several interrelated ideas which need unravelling here, but which nonetheless fundamentally have to be understood in relation to each other. They are:

-The norm as a guide, a rule, a principle. Ancient idea of norm.

-The norm as an ideal, as something to strive for, as something which
must be fostered and cared for.

-The norm as mediocrity, as danger of degeneration.

(we carry both these latter 2 idea of normalcy faround with us all the
ttime)...

both ocnditioned by:

-The rise of statistical thinking, the relation between individual and mass, the definition of an individual as a cell within an n-dimensional grid whose axes are determined by the 'avalanche of numbers'

Idea of normalcy, so powerful today, did not exist as we know it 200 years ago. Instead, other ways of categorizing human difference ruled: e.g., distinction btwn “grotesque” and ordinary, btwn holy and sinful, btwn mad and sane.

The rise of normalcy is fundamentally related to the “avalanche of printed numbers”, the sudden surge in the production of quantitative data of all kinds which begins in the Napoleonic Era and continues to grow unabated to this day. It is above all the sense that phenomena of all kinds obey the “laws of large numbers” -- the rules of statistics -- that things as diverse ass the human birth rate, the rate of criminal activity, the number of dead letters arriving at the central post office every month -- display a regularity as ffixed and constant as the rotation of the heavens ----- it is this sensee that loes behind the power of the norm in our day. The statistical norm is the living proof of the laws that govern capricious fate, and also of the laws that govern human action and ddesire. To ben ormal -- or to avoid or cry out against normalcy -- is to participate in a lived relationship to the collective of all other citizens, men, homosezxuals, humans, or hairdressers (pick your category!). Normalcy can be an oporessive force (to be forced to be normal) or an emancipatory one (to assert that e.g. one's sexual preference is itself normal); no matter what form it takes, it is the sinequa non of our experience of ourselves and also of the world.

In seciton last week we spoke less than I had wished about the importance of statistical reasoning, which goes hand in hand with the idea of the norm but which needn't always make reference to it. Perhaps the most extraordinary and quotidian expression of statistical reasoning is the tendency to understand all personal and collective decisions in terms of risks. What are the cnhances that I”'ll get hit by a car today? Statistically speaking, which subway route gets me home the quickest? What are the chances I'll make itt hrough this semester without going crazy? These (often more orl ess subliminal) questions we ask ourselves are relics of the nineteenth century, a part of our inheritance from thinmkers like Quetelet and Bertillon.

Statistics itself developed handi n glove with the expansion of the State. Its name bears witness to this fact. ; but its reach went beyond the purely political to encompass all aspects of scientific inquiry thatm ight have relevance for State planning & welfare. Combining with the techniqueso f “error analysis” in the experimental sciences, (& also & especially astronomy) statistics became a powerful scientific force over the course ofh te nineteenth century; and though its rise began, in many ways, with the relatively unsophisticated analyses of Adolphe Quertelet, it was not long before quite brilliant mathematicians began to formulate increasingly ocmplex tools for statistical analysis of data of all kinds.

Interestingly, the idea of the norm did not always mesh unproblematically with statisitcal reasons, not everywhere in the mid nineteenth cnetury. I want to begin to work my way towards hysteria by discussing one case where the two ideas were seen to be fundamentally opposed to each other. ; this will, I hope, shed some light on the unevenness of the transition to statistical reason, and give an idea of the place of normalcy in /medical/ practice in this period.

/Claude Bernard: /pathologies as deviations from the norm. (1813-1878)

Diabetes as key model. Raging debate over status of /glycemia, presence
of sugars in blood/. Known to exist in diabetics, and to pass from blood
into urine (glycosurea). Question: is this a wholly patholgical
phenomenon? Or a /variation from the norm/?

Bernard, 1877:

There is only one glycemia, it is constant, permanent, both during diabetes and outside that morbid state. Only it has degreesÖ glycemia below 3 to 4% does not lead to glycosuria; but above that level glycosuria results... It is impossible to perceive the transition from the normal to the pathological state, and no problem shows better than diabetes the intimate fusion of physiology and pathology. (Canguilhem,
70)

cf an opposing view:

 The diabetic state cannot be attributed to the overintensification of a
physiological operation which does not exist... it is impossible to
regard diabetes as the overintensification of a regular operation: it is
the expression of an operation completely foreign to normal life. This
operation is in itself the essence of the disease. (71)

And finally, one last quote:

Health and disease are not 2 essentially diffeent modes as the ancient
physicians believed and some practicioners still believe. They should
not be made into distinct principles, entities which fight over the
living organism and make it the theater of their contest... In reality,
between these two modes of being, there are only differences of degree:
exaggeration, disproportion, discordance of normal phenomena constitute
the diseases state. There is no case where disease would have produced
new conditions, a complete change of scene, some new and special
products. (71)

/once this principle is established, possible to use investigation of
pathology as a substitute for lab experimentation, as a way to
investigate nature of normal human organism. /

What is important for us here is this sense of a continuum along which
normal and abnormal states of being are placed.

-not polar opposites, but continuous variation; for a scientist, see
normal and pathological states as intimately linked to each other.

-Perhaps strangely, Bernard resisteed the use of statistical reasoning
in medical science. An abstraction like “l'homme moyen”, he argued,
fwould never be any good for analysing a concrete case.

The fapparent contradiction here can only be made sensee of by realizing
that Bernard's idea of “normal” was not yet our own; it referred to the
normal or “desired” state of an individual organism, not to the
statistical average. That this idea is hard to grasp shows that the
triumph of normalcy as we know was not yet complete, even in Paris in
the mid 19^{th} century.

If this view is most explicitly and fully developed in work of CB, then
it is made most general in philoosphical works of August Comte, the
founder of positivist philosophy and one-time pupil of St-Simon.

-Comte argued famously that, just as /biological/ pathologies were the
result of variations from the normal biological state, so /social/ and
/political/ pathologies were the result of variations from the
social/political/moral norm.

-To correct deviations, one had to strive to reaffirm the norm.

So when combine Quetelet with Bernard, get ‘the norm' replacing ‘human
nature' as a /desirable /state which needs to be identified, analyzed,
and eventually, /accomplished/ (brought about).

-all phenomena are characterized by a /continuous variation/ or
/deviance/ from the norm, which needs to be /minimized/ if the social
organism is to remain healthy.

From this constellation of theories around normalcy I think it should be
clear that the question of human subjectivity -- of our moral and
intellectual capacities, of our relative merits, of our mental
pahtologies -- was always inherently implicated by the idea of normalcy.
To a certain degree, the rule of individual reason -- autonomy -- was
being replaced by the rule of abstract reason -- statistics.

We see this quite clearly in the study of criminality. Bertillon's
efforts to classify the body of the criminal was matched by attempts to
classify his mind -- Lombroso's being most famous among them.

(cf. CSI, profiling, the Serial Killer)

* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Risk Societies
** Where this Converswation comes from
In the 1980's, two prominent sociologists gave voice to a sentiment that something new had just recently emerged -- what they called a "risk society" or a "risk culture", by which they meant, a new kind of relationship to dangers, in which those dangers are both predictable and generated by society itself -- rather than by some external natural force.  Anthony Giddens and Ulrich Beck both suggested that this new kind of society had emerged i nthe 1970's with what they called a "radical break" from earlier forms of social organization and relationships to danger, and that it was characterized by a new obssesion with reisk management, which storngly idverged from the "classical" modernity of the nineteenth and early 20th centuries.

As with most ascriptions of radical novelty, this hinged on a systematic  refusal to recognize historical precedents.  Levy's entrancing book /Freaks of Fortune/ can in some ways be read as a response to this (mostly sociological, not historical) literature, which to some extent transposes many of the "risk-centric" phenomena back into the 19th century.  

But more than that, it also rewrites risk, at least in the American context, as deeply interwoven with the history of slavery and race.  This conjunction allows us to address (at least glancingly) a number of themes of great importance, which we have thus far only discussed indirectly:

- the centrality of *slavery* to 18th and 19th century capitalism, and the importance of enslavement as a *laboratory* for innovation in a variety of areas: finance, management practices, technology.
- very brief introduction to the development of abstract financial instruments, and the transformation of financial landscape that they entail
- the origins of the "science of work", and their relationship to physiology (more on this next class)
- the rise of *a particular notion of what it means to be a free person*, which is related to all the other themes in fascinating ways.  
** Actuarial Science, Finance, and the development of "risk" as a catagory
Levy opens with an interesting observation; that as latye as the ealry c. 19, the word "risque" was still given the French spelling and appeared almost exclusively as a /technical term/ in /maritime financial writings/, and in almost no other context. That's why he opens the book with a quote form Melville: 
#+begin_quote
this easy, indifferent sword must be chance— aye, chance, free will, and necessity— no wise incompatible— all interweavingly working together. The straight warp of necessity, not to be swerved from its ultimate course— its every alternating vibration, indeed, only tending to that; free will still free to ply her shuttle between given threads; and chance, though restrained in its play within the right lines of necessity, and sideways in its motions directed by free will, though thus pre- scribed to by both, chance by turns rules either, and has the last featuring blow at events. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::10++0.331081][freaks fortune full text]], 10)
#+end_quote

The word "risque" in this context referred /exclusively/ to a commodity bought and sold in an insurance contract. (ff p.12)  The question we want to ask is, how did "risk" go from a quantity which only made sense in a very limited context, to a very widely-generalized condition that was managed at a corporate, at an individual, and eventually at a State level? Levy's answer twists and turns quite a bit; in this lecture I'll try to straighten it out a little bit, though I'm not really confident I'll do it justice.  
*** Financial Risk
As we have already (briefly) discussed, the late c. 18 and early c. 19 saw an "avalanche of numbers" -- a vast, many orders-of-magnitude expansion in state record-keeping; it's interesting in this context to note that the US decennial census is written into the constitution just before 1800. these numbers made it possible to perceive regularities that had not previously been visible, e.g. in birth rates, in death rates, in criminal activity. And we have discussed the odd roll of /providence/ in these discussions -- how the evidence of regularity in /crime/ required thinkers to reassess the status of *regularity in itself* as evidence of divine Providence.  It turns out that Providence plays a role, also, in a separate thread that Levy picks up and brings to our attention. 

*Insurance* comes into being slowly, over the course of centuries, mostly as a part of the *shipping trade* form the time of mercantile capitalism to the 19th century. 
- by selling "risks" to each other, merchants crafted  akind of "collective strategy for economi security?" (ff 22). "risk communities"

- huge turning point is when this "risk" itself beocmes the principle object of a particular enterprise's activities.

- second turning point is when these enterprises can actually mobilize reliable statistics to transform the "risk" into a stable/predictable object around which a /business strategy/ can be predicted with the aid of mathematics.

- statistics then becomes as it were *a business technology* among many others.

- insurance starts at sea, and rapidly spreads to other kindso f enterprises, of which th most impressive is *life insurance*. (more soon)

- the success of *insurance* -- which we're not done talking about -- is eventually generalized through the development of the *futures market* in commodities

- this in turn leads eventually to the development of *abstract financial instruments* of the kind that were instrumental in the 21008 meltdown of the financial system and which are now regianing prominence

- monumental change in the *centre of gravity of capitalism itself*, with most wealth among the truly wealthy today coming from stock markets (rather than, say, oil, or plastics, or weapons manufacture, or Internet companies), with complex portfolios replacing individual stocks and bonds for most investors
*** Back to Insurance, and what it means to be a person
But let's not forget insurance.  
- the big question we might ask is, what exactly is insurance? What is it for, and how does it shape us? But also, how does insurance -- the insurancei ndustry in c. 19 -- rely on a vision of what it means to be a human being? The naswer... is fascinating!

- insurance as a *form of ocllectivism* similar to Robert Owens or other socialisms;
- but what does it mean to *insure an individual life*?
- objections in c. 19 to life insurance were many; moral objections on basis of *evil of betting on a man's death*, but also *dominion of mere figuring over the will*
- proponents of life insurance saw it as *"security that free society intself had 'ceased to render'"* (ff 92)
- so "insurance" here takes the form of a social bond
- but also stnds ironically in opposition to "entrepreneurial spirit", even though "entrepreneurship" was being increasingly underwritten by actuarial principles.
- all of which brings any number of questions on whati t means to be a "free person"  -- what the role of *risk* is in *freedom*.
- cf the paternal mythology of slaveholding society -- that the great virtue of slavery was that it also brought "security" to its subjects

**** (back on the slave ship)

- which finally brings us back t o the court case that is at the centre of the chapter you read for today.  In /McCargo vs. New Orleans Insurance Co./ what was fundamentally at issue was, "what was the relationship between freedom and insurable risk?"
- to follow this, we need to understand that *free acts of wil lwere not insurable*.
- [go over the story here: dramatic rebellion at sea, slaves overcome crew and slaveowners, killing one slaver and forcing redirection to Jamaica.  Why? And what happens then?]
- at issue: when did the loss of property occur? And could it be predicted?
- remarkable arguments of Benjamin, laywer for Insurance company, that slaves /are only slaves by circumstance/ -- and therefore, their intrinsic personness makes them non-chattel, not-property, from the moment of rebellion.  In this fashion rebellion was intrinsically uninsurable
- freedom also incompatible with insurance itself -- the insurer could never be held liable for any act of a free man.  


*** Scientific Management & slavery
Because we're over here in slaveryland, we get th e chance to step back and ask, how did this system -- the slave power -- operate? 
- incredible increase in productivity over the course of first half of c. 19.  
- story of sci management as we know it -- Taylor and Gilbraith
- motion-based rationalization
- movements gainst "enslavement"
- in fact, we see similar techniques in slavery.  balance sheets of lives. Encentive systems. 
#+begin_quote
Planters blended innovation, information, and vio­lence as they drove up the pace of  labor, conducted experiments, and distributed incentives. On the pages of account books, the power of masters over slaves transformed men and women into units of labor power, labor power into bales of cotton, and cotton into profit. (rosenthal, 137)
#+end_quote
- pricing of lives

#+begin_quote
Modern narratives of cap­i­tal­ist development often emphasize the posi- tive-­sum outcomes of many individual choices. They suggest that ­f ree, even selfish, decisions go hand in hand with growth and innovation. They also assume that vast wealth accumulated by a few accompanies improved cir- cumstances for many. The history of slavery’s capitalism warns against all these expectations. In the eigh­teenth and nineteenth centuries, slavery proved highly adaptable to the pursuit of profit. F ­ ree markets for slaveholders flour- ished, and their control over men, w ­ omen, and ­children expedited produc ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::221++0.7297295][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 221)

into massive fortunes—­both through financial maneuvering and through human reproduction. The power of capital to control labor was rarely more acutely felt than where labor was capital. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::222++0.154655][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 222)

#+end_quote

** Notes on Class Readings
#+BEGIN_SRC elisp :results output raw :var level=(1+ (org-current-level))
(mwp/pdf-multi-extract '(
"/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf" 
"/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf" ))
#+END_SRC

#+RESULTS:
*** Quotes From freaks fortune full text

this easy, indiff erent sword must be chance— aye, chance, free will, and necessity— no wise incompatible— all interweavingly working together. The straight warp of necessity, not to be swerved from its ultimate course— its every alternating vibration, indeed, only tending to that; free will still free to ply her shuttle between given threads; and chance, though restrained in its play within the right lines of necessity, and sideways in its motions directed by free will, though thus pre- scribed to by both, chance by turns rules either, and has the last featuring blow at events. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::10++0.331081][freaks fortune full text]], 10)

. Long a technical concept in the fi nancial arena of marine in- surance, at the end of the eigh teenth century “risk” still simply referred to the commodity bought and sold in an insurance contract. Outside the worldo f long-distnace maritime trade risk had very little meaning or use. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::12++0.6463965][freaks fortune full text]], 12)

As the contemporary sociologist François Ewald explains, risk was now “in human beings, in their conduct, in their liberty, in the relations between them, in the fact of their association, in society.” 3 Since risk is now so ubiquitous, it might seem impossible to write its history. Yet, risk does have a history. As a human invention, as a historical protagonist, risk has a biography. In the United States, the most decisive chapters in risk’s history were written in the nineteenth century. For by the end of that century, much like throughout the world today, risk was in fact everywhere. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::13++0.6914415][freaks fortune full text]], 13)

But risk did not appear out of nowhere. It was born on the deep, in the act of maritime voyaging. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::14++0.1283785][freaks fortune full text]], 14)

contingent event that a “peril of the seas” or an “act of God” struck their long- distance voyages and destroyed their property. Risk did not then mean extreme peril, hazard, or danger. 4 It did not refer to the immaterial fear of an undesirable event. Rather, it originally referred to something material: a fi nancial instrument for coping with the mere possibility of peril, hazard, or danger. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::14++0.3085585][freaks fortune full text]], 14)

Risk made its appearance in the En glish language in the sixteenth century, but in the United States even as late as the 1820s it had yet to be fully anglicized from “risque”— the commodity exchanged in a marine insurance contract. Then, rather suddenly, risk exploded in everyday language. So would fi nancial risk management. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::14++0.6006009999999999][freaks fortune full text]], 14)

Risk management was for off shore hazards, inapplicable to dan- gers onshore, where men might tremble before “acts of God” instead of commodifying them. Many onshore dangers— fi re, disease, a bad harvest, a premature death— were after all still biblical in nature. Religious au- thorities counseled that in the end divine providence ruled over the fu- ture. And if the future was certain because God determined it, then risk management might be unnecessary, if not all together wrong. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::15++0.1734235][freaks fortune full text]], 15) `

Risk thus recasts the history of American capitalism from the stand- point of powerful new fi nancial corporations. Finance is an expansive terrain. But analyzing the nitty- gritty details of new fi nancial practices demonstrates how risk burrowed into pop u lar consciousness. Moreover, following risk across many registers of thought, action, and experience captures much of the human drama of capitalist transformation. The spread of commerce; the rise and fall of American slavery; the Industrial Revolution; the economic development of the West; the ascendance of the corporation— all were at stake in the rise of corporate risk manage- ment. But so was how Americans thought about the future, felt about the future, acted upon it, managed it, and sometimes simply resigned them- selves to it. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::16++0.1734235][freaks fortune full text]], 16)

A generation— fi nanciers, abolitionists, actuaries, jurists, preachers, legisla- tors, corporate executives, phi los o phers, social scientists— developed a vision of freedom that linked the liberal ideal of self- ownership to the personal assumption of “risk.” In a demo cratic society, according to the new gospel, free and equal men must take, run, own, assume, bear, carry, and manage personal risks. That involved actively attempting to become the master of one’s own personal destiny, adopting a moral duty to attend to the future. Which meant taking risks. But it also meant offl oading one’s risk onto new fi nancial corporations— like when a wage worker insured his productive labor against workplace accident, an ex- slave opened a savings account, or a Wall Street fi nancier hatched a corporate profi t- sharing and employee benefi t plan. A new vision of what it meant to be a free and secure actor thus took shape in the new material and psychologi- cal reality created by the modern American corporate fi nancial system. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::16++0.533784][freaks fortune full text]], 16)

In ruling Farwell personally responsible for the “risk,” Shaw also led the wage worker, almost by the nose, to a fl edgling corporate fi nancial system. There the wage worker might offl oad, commercially, that same personal “risk”— just like merchants offl oaded the risks of long- distance trade. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::19++0.1283785][freaks fortune full text]], 19)

The Massachusetts Court ruled against the crippled workingman. According to Shaw, Farwell, in contracting out his productive labor, had taken “upon himself the risks and perils incident to his situation” as an engine- man. The two words “risk” and “peril” did not then have the same meaning, and Shaw was not being loose with language. The peril of the accident, Shaw reasoned, was already priced into Farwell’s wage, which was higher than the wages paid to workers who were engaged in less hazardous tasks. Within his two- dollar- per- day wage was a “premium for the risk which he thus assumes.” Therefore, the railroad corporation was responsible to Farwell for no further compensation. 3 ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::19++0.39864849999999996][freaks fortune full text]], 19)

And, over time, American courts would begin to recognize employer negligence and liability for some categories of workplace accident. Further down the road, railroad brotherhoods, a new collective strategy, would cope with the individual cost of workplace accident. In time, in the early twentieth century, states would pass workmen’s compensation laws. 9 All of these paths run through Farwell and have been illuminated by historians with great care. The reason to linger over Farwell— besides, at the outset, to emphasize the crucial role of the law in setting the work- ing rules of risk— is to pin down the maritime source of its individualist logic. But it is also to underscore the practical endpoint it implied: the potential offl oading of Farwell’s freshly minted personal risk onto a fi - nancial corporation. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::22++0.5112615][freaks fortune full text]], 22)

this double arc: the emergence, in tandem, of a new individualism and a new corporate fi nancial system in nineteenth- century America. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::24++0.668919][freaks fortune full text]], 24)

Nevertheless, moral, productive risk- taking could pass an elusive threshold and become immoral, unproductive gambling. Indeed, the gambler and the confi dence man were the nagging evil alter egos of the productive risk- taker. 26 In par tic u lar, many Americans, especially those who worked with their hands, were always suspicious that fi nanciers— who often did nothing but take risks— were unproductive “parasites” on the “real” economy. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::27++0.2184685][freaks fortune full text]], 27)

Freedley’s A Practical Treatise on Business stated that a man had a moral “right to risk his own capital.” 38 But he had “no right to risk the property of oth- ers.” There would have to be new legal and po liti cal regulations of this kind of fi nancial behavior—while not denying the fi nancial system its lifeblood of circulating capital. If not, Americans would learn the hard way that fi nancial dispossession and plunder would accompany the as- sumption of risk. Risk management, that is, put fi nanciers in possession of other people’s money. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::31++0.24023999999999998][freaks fortune full text]], 31)

Insuring the passage ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::32++0.9166665][freaks fortune full text]], 32)

of their cargoes, merchants sold their “risks” to each other: risks on timber bound from New En gland to the West Indies; on rice bound from the Carolinas to London; on slaves bound from West Africa to the Chesapeake. Much like there was a commercial trade in rice, so was there a commercial trade in risk. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::33++0.162162][freaks fortune full text]], 33)

Merchants thus turned the for-profit engine of a fi nancial market into a collective strategy for economic security. Running the risks of long- distance trade, they strained to foresee, control, and manipulate the con- tingent link between present and future. They also sought to profi t from it. Merchants formed what might be termed “risk communities”— collectivities that socialized personal fi nancial “risks.” ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::33++0.24099099999999998][freaks fortune full text]], 33)

. For before men became the proprietors of “risks” on their own free selves, they fi rst owned the “risks” on the bodies of their slaves. Before risk was an element of self- ownership, that is, it was an element of slave own ership. 6 ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::33++0.849099][freaks fortune full text]], 33)

Yet the decision itself took shape in a roundabout way, when the Louisiana Supreme Court faced the vex- ing question of whether or not a slave revolt was one of the “perils of the seas.” Was a slave revolt an act of God? ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::34++0.5563065][freaks fortune full text]], 34)

When the Louisiana Supreme Court heard the case of Thomas Mc- Cargo v. The New Orleans Insurance Company, the fundamental ques- tion was how insuring human chattel was diff erent from insuring other forms of property in motion across the high seas— say, bales of cotton. Obviously, cotton did not mutiny. But for centuries, human chattels had always been objects of risk insured by their own ers when in transit, most often across the Atlantic Ocean. Legal disputes over insurance liability for slave revolts in the Atlantic World were not uncommon and the case of the Creole was one of the last in a grotesque series. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::39++0.33108099999999996][freaks fortune full text]], 39)

The court recognized that a slave- owner ipso facto owned the “risk” on his slave’s life— a logical consequence of slave own ership. A slave, likewise by defi nition, could not own his or her “risk.” His or her fate belonged to his or her master and the “risk” commodifi ed that des- tiny as the master’s private property. But when the Creole slaves dared to revolt— chasing the greatest upside of all, their freedom— and succeeded, they had thereby repossessed, reenclosed as it were, their own personal “risks.” The court adopted a tellingly circular argument. In their act of revolt, seizing their risks back from their masters, the Creole (ex-)slaves now owned themselves. Consequently, their former masters could no longer insure them. The successful revolt voided the insurance contract. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::39++0.623874][freaks fortune full text]], 39)

Now, from a distance, mer- chants contemplated the future “perils of the seas” that endangered their commodities in motion. From such anxiety, they commodifi ed their doubts into a new form of private property called “risk.” Merchants, in other words, isolated “risk” from physical goods in ways that allowed them to buy and sell that same “risk” in de pen dent of those same goods. Insuring their cargoes, they exchanged risks, offl oading fi nancial re- sponsibility for their losses. In northern Italy, its apparent birthplace, marine insurance was fi rmly established by the fi fteenth century. 19 ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::40++0.533784][freaks fortune full text]], 40)

In the midst of a fl urry of postrevolution- ary incorporations there arose new marine insurance companies. The fi rst was the Insurance Company of North America, chartered by the Pennsylvania legislature in 1792. The New Orleans Insurance Company, which would insure many of the Creole risks, dates to 1805. By 1810, the private, individual underwriting of marine risks in America had almost ceased, with a total of twenty- six corporations now buying up maritime risks in the leading ports of Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and New York. By 1837, there were thirty- seven corporations in Boston alone. That year, one London underwriter estimated that American corpora- tions underwrote 95 percent of American maritime risks. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::41++0.713964][freaks fortune full text]], 41)

In 1841, there were still no statistics computing the relative frequency of these events. There was no actuarial knowledge. 35 In an 1839 article in the Mer- chant’s Magazine and Commercial Review entitled “Rates of Premium for Marine Insurance,” an aging Balch explained that, “Hitherto, the com- putation of premiums of insurance on marine risks has been on no sys- tematic or regular principles, but on the loose, general, and indefi nite impressions of those who make the contracts.” 36 The pages of Balch’s brokerage journal provide the right image: a messy compilation of num- bers, scribbles, and pasted newspaper clippings running over each other, upside down and sideways. Unlike later actuarial tables, no one besides Balch could use this journal to price a risk. Only prudence and foresight distinguished the successful underwriter. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::46++0.6013515][freaks fortune full text]], 46)

minded him, “I never had risqued my interest abroad without insur- ance.” The Atlantic slave trade— which brought 12.5 million Africans to the New World, 450,000 alighting on future or current U.S. ports— was impractical without marine insurance. 40 ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::48++0.2635135][freaks fortune full text]], 48)

Slaves sold to New Orleans down the Mississippi River were also commonly insured. Merchant under- writers had once insured, literally, the possibility of New World slavery. Now, corporations like the New Orleans Insurance Company insured its future in the United States. 4 ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::48++0.533784][freaks fortune full text]], 48)

Within them, single risks fractured into ab- stract bits as merchants sliced, repackaged, and resold risks in a dizzying sequence— until risks had been socialized almost beyond recognition. With respect to the onshore society, for centuries— and right up until the time the Creole sailed— the social logic of mercantile risk communities was quite unique ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::48++0.759009][freaks fortune full text]], 48)

Benjamin had simply applied the insurance liability checklist of fore- sight, volition, and responsibility— distinguishing an insurable “act of God” from a noninsurable “act of man”— to the thing insured itself. First, the group of nineteen’s prudent exercise of foresight, their contemplation of a “probable chance,” was crucial. Their mental “preparation” for the Creole’s voyage was in fact superior to that of Captain Ensor. With a “prob- able chance” assessed, slaves possessed “passions,” likewise generated “by nature,” which sprung their wills into action to “conquer” their “own liberty.” At that moment, the night of November 7, 1841, “the blacks as- serted their freedom”— a moral capacity for freedom that was only dor- mant until then. They performed like men, not property, and their risks were no longer insurable by their masters, no matter what the policy said. They had been repossessed by their slaves, the rule of double commodi- fi cation was broken, and there no longer being slaves there could no longer be “slave risks.” By foreseeing a probable chance, acting upon it, and be- coming responsible for the event afterward, the Creole slaves simply did what free men do. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::62++0.35360349999999996][freaks fortune full text]], 62)

Further, in the largely agricultural South, the master class developed a countermovement of its own. Enjoying the continued commercial re- nais sance of chattel slavery, invoking the providential paternalism of the ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::73++0.8265765][freaks fortune full text]], 73)

freeholders and slave own ers sharply distinguished their economic forms of life from northeastern urban dwellers. Antebellum corporate risk management was in competition and confl ict. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::74++0.150901][freaks fortune full text]], 74)

If self- ownership meant that men had absolute, exclusive property rights over their own persons, and if a “risk” was an element of that self- ownership, then Wright sought to actuarially demonstrate that a policy- holder had a property right to an equitable cash “surrender value” from an insurance company if he no longer desired, or was able, to pay the premiums on his “life risk.” ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::75++0.48873849999999996][freaks fortune full text]], 75)

Actuarial science had two historical foundations. The fi rst was the existence of mortality statistics. The second was a probability theory that could transform them into average life expectancies. Originally ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::91++0.8265765][freaks fortune full text]], 91)

theory, published his First Lectures on Life Insurance. In 1762 he founded London’s fi rst actuarial insurance company. After a century of delay, formal probability theory had entered the world of commercial practice. 4 ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::92++0.1734235][freaks fortune full text]], 92)

enthusiast, added the qualifi er that statistical law had nothing to do with any mysterious interposition of “Providence.” But apparently the uni- verse still preferred a standard of perfect certainty. In this framing, the mathematical computation of probabilities left no room for qualitative and radical forms of uncertainty. 51 ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::93++0.364865][freaks fortune full text]], 93)

spoke of the new “arrangement of society” in which all were “left to take care for himself.” What was needed was a “social liberty” to compensate for the “terrors of uncertainty.” The “Fourierists” and “Socialists” went too far. The answer was to get “society united on the basis of mutual insur- ance.” ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::97++0.668919][freaks fortune full text]], 97)

thing other than contingent “productive energy” had been commodifi ed, threatening to cross the threshold separating freedom from slavery. The speculation on death had carried no actuarial price. Finally, replacing potential widows and orphans, the speculator himself became the new benefi ciary of the policy. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::99++0.8265765][freaks fortune full text]], 99)

The fi nal antebellum de cades witnessed the resurgence of chattel slavery in a highly capitalistic form— fueled by the twin cotton booms of the 1830s and 1850s and chastened only by the twin fi nancial panics of 1837 and 1857. The place of the Old South in the nineteenth- century development of capitalism has long posed an interpretive conundrum for historians. 65 From the perspective of risk, late southern slave society harbored a distinct countermovement against the generative insecurities and radical uncertainties of capitalism. Moreover, the character of this countermovement helps isolate the par tic u lar developmental dynamic of the Old South, in growing contrast to the emergent free society of the North. Freedom— newly reliant upon corporate risk management— emerges as the truly peculiar institution. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::100++0.48873849999999996][freaks fortune full text]], 100)

In this line of thought, the paternalism of slave mastery ensured for everyone a baseline economic security— that great chestnut of late pro- slavery ideology. The editor’s 1860 introduction to Cotton is King spelled out the “true defi nition” of slavery. The abolitionist notion, that slavery was the complete own ership of a person, was a fi ction. Rather, “Slavery is the duty and obligation of the slave to labor for the mutual benefi t of ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::102++0.713964][freaks fortune full text]], 102)

sistence,” and to “accumulate a fund for sickness, disability, and old age.” The slave labored for a customary “right” to the master’s unerring provision. 72 ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::103++0.150901][freaks fortune full text]], 103)

In the North, he added, personal insurance corporations increas- ingly provided the “security” that free society itself had “ceased to ren- der.” All the worse, insurance companies, being in the market, “often fail.” What he called “Slavery insurance,” on the other hand, “never fails, and covers all losses and misfortunes.” “Domestic slavery,” Fitzhugh concluded, “is nature’s mutual insurance society.” ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::103++0.39864849999999996][freaks fortune full text]], 103)

For one, American slave masters practiced a variety of safety- fi rst agriculture, being much less focused on market production than their Atlantic peers. American plantations were largely self- suffi cient units as the majority of output— corn, vegetables, meat, clothes, construction materials, farm implements— was directly consumed. As Hughes ex- plained, the only way to make economic life “certain, unvarying, posi- tive, absolute, and unconditional” was for men to “receive directly, their share of produce.” ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::105++0.1734235][freaks fortune full text]], 105)

That is why life insurance made so little inroads into southern planta- tion. Slaves were capital assets and there was no reason not to insure them as such. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::105++0.849099][freaks fortune full text]], 105)

The rising class of northern industrial hirelings was suff ering from a kind of unfreedom, even if, morally, comparing them to slaves was a fundamental category mistake. 87 Very few antebellum Americans cherished the status of wage laborer. Wage laborers were a minority of the antebellum working population— and many of them were already dependent women and children— but they were a growing minority, and evidently a class of permanent industrial hirelings who would never join the cherished ranks of in de pen dent proprietors was forming. In this context, Wright began to wonder, “whether the system of work to the lowest bidder, which has been adopted throughout the civilized world as an improvement upon slavery and feudalism” was after all “the perfec- tion of freedom?” The fi nal cornerstone of his actuarial science of free- dom was now set. 88 ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::108++0.5112615][freaks fortune full text]], 108)

Wright decided that without personal insurance there would be “wage slavery.” Only fi nancial innovation could salvage free labor. Double com- modifi cation would transform the future “productive energy” of the hire- ling into a form of “capital.” ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::108++0.804054][freaks fortune full text]], 108)

In this context, Wright decided the “forfeiture clause” was thievery. But the theft was only visible actuarially for the key was the nature of “level premium” life insurance. “Leveled” premiums meant that each year the premium was the same amount. But the cost of insurance each year was not the same, as it increased with age. So, in the early years of a policy a man overpaid for coverage. It was that accumulating overpay- ment that was the true, actuarial “value of the policy”— the money value of the personal “risk” still belonging, by right, to the policyholder. It was really an accumulated “savings” above the cost of present insurance to pay for future insurance. Corporations, Wright held, should repay the sum to those who wanted to surrender their policy before term— a “sur- render value. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::109++0.623874][freaks fortune full text]], 109)

Nevertheless, Wright’s “surrender value” bill became Massachusetts law April 10, 1861. The bill passed only because of Wright’s impeccable antislavery credentials, as the insurance commissioner was in favor with the Republican state house. Wright was only half satisfi ed however as the law only secured four- fi fths of the full “value of the policy” and not as a cash payment— the four- fi fths was commuted to a policy of term insurance. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::111++0.37612599999999996][freaks fortune full text]], 111)

But the universe was not an unceasing act of God. Thankfully, “science” was now “rele- gating the human imagination to its proper sphere.” The new “doctrine of chances” supplied “to mankind, in regard to a great many subjects, a sort of substitute” for the “fore- knowledge, or prophetic power” of God. No longer believing in the ways of providence, Wright, the former evan- gelical abolitionist, died an atheist actuary. 103 ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/freaks-fortune-full-text.pdf::114++0.195946][freaks fortune full text]], 114)

*** Quotes From rosenthal accounting slavery

Though Taylor marketed his system as new, even revolutionary, slave- holders using scientific agriculture had already experimented with many of the same techniques. At its peak, scientific agriculture influenced the prac- tices of thousands of planters and overseers. The most calculating prac­t i­ tion­ers conducted experiments akin to time and motion studies, recording more data than Taylor or his disciples. 21 Culling from the surviving rec­ ords of 114 plantations, economists Alan Olmstead and Paul Rhode re- cently compiled a data set of 602,219 individual observations of daily cotton picking—­far more than the meager and distorted data used to construct Taylor’s “pig tale.” ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::23++0.12012049999999999][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 23)

Pointing to the general neglect of slavery in most business histories, man- agement scholar Bill Cooke has described what he calls the “denial of slavery” in management studies. He points out that in 1860, “when the historical orthodoxy has modern management emerging on the railroads” in the United States and Europe, 38,000 plantation overseers “­were managing 4 million slaves.” Moreover, they ­were ­doing so “according to classical management and Taylo- rian princi­ples.” Cooke charges management scholars not with ignorance but with “denial” ­because evidence of slaveholders’ management practices was readily available in published historical lit­er­a­ture. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::23++0.5990995][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 23)

The symbolic power of slavery’s scientific management is less inspirational but perhaps even more impor­ tant. We live in a global economy where the l ­ abor of production is often in- visible. Distance and quantitative management facilitate this erasure, and assumptions about capitalism and freedom help conceal it. Neither “­f ree” trade nor “­free” markets have any necessary relationship with other kinds of ­human freedoms. Indeed, the history of plantation slavery shows that the opposite can be true. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::25++0.6854355000000001][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 25)

Thus, the usefulness of a balance sheet of lives becomes clear: planters needed not only to monitor the increase and decrease of their ­human stock but also to monitor changes in skill and ­labor allocation. Without this informa- tion, they risked losing their crop. A breakdown in one stage of the production pro­cess could cause the ­whole works to grind to a halt. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::33++0.5555555][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 33)

The presence of enslaved healers can be understood in contrasting ways. On the one hand, ­these men and ­women helped maintain the health of the plantation, prob­ably at a lower cost than would ­free doctors. By offering em- ployment for el­derly slaves, ­t hese roles also helped planters exploit t ­ hose who could not l ­ abor in the fields. On the other hand, they reflect the enduring influence and authority of skilled Africans—an influence that planters some- times wished they could eliminate. In his plantation manual, Thomas Roughley described midwives as “egregiously ignorant” and “most obstinately addicted to their own way.” ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::49++0.6854355000000001][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 49)

From one perspective, the very existence of Maroon communities reflects the remarkable success of former slaves in carving out spaces of freedom. However, in order to secure their own safety, Jamaican Maroons signed a treaty with the British government in 1739. The treaty required that they refuse to accept f ­ uture runaways. This offered a kind of amnesty, but it also hardened the bound­aries of freedom, enabling a more precise numbering of enslaved lives on the islands. By for- bidding runaways from joining Maroon communities, planters made both escaped slaves and ­f ree Maroons more manageable. Without new additions, communities would not swell to amorphous, system-­threatening proportions. The 1739 treaty also required the Maroons to serve alongside the British mi- litia in case of rebellion. In 1760, when slaves ­rose up in Tacky’s Rebellion, they navigated between the dual threat of British militias who controlled the plantation plains and Maroon militias who controlled the mountains. Ulti- mately, both forces joined together to put down the insurrection. 93 ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::57++0.49024049999999997][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 57)

The system of bundling papers and storing them with similar documents constituted a practical filing system, and the wrapped packets that this system relied on can be found throughout eighteenth-­ and nineteenth-­century ar- chives. The practice has preserved loose accounts for modern historians, no doubt ­because it was carefully designed to preserve and or­ga­n ize informa- tion for account keepers themselves. Each report or other document was first folded to a uniform size (a bit narrower than a standard #10 envelope). ­These packets w ­ ere labeled with abstracts and then sorted with similar papers into the small cabinets of a pigeonhole desk. 21 ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::78++0.1854355][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 78)

grew. For example, in 1785, the Columbian Herald of Charleston, South Carolina, advertised the sale of “New Negroes, 45l to 50l cash—75l at 6 or 9 months credit” (Figure 2.4). 57 Viewed from a distance—­say, from the comfort of an absentee planter’s desk across the Atlantic—­sorting through reports, com- paring production totals, and consulting price currents could make earning profits appear as no more than a prob­lem of multiplication. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::88++0.20870900000000003][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 88)

Understanding the relationship between slavery and management prac- tices in the American South is the subject of this chapter and the next. In the simplifying language of twentieth-­century economics, ­there are three inputs of production: land, ­labor, and capital. Slaves confounded the last of ­these cat- egories, at once l ­ abor and capital, and planters analyzed them in both ways, ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::103++0.2942945][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 103)

and accounting for cotton. As he wrote, “Each picker had a ‘stint’ or daily task to perform; that is, each of them was required to pick so many pounds of cotton.” Thompson was “placed over the hands as ‘boss’ and cotton-­ weigher.” He described mea­sur­ing each slave’s pro­gress as often as “three times each day.” Such frequent weighing enabled the enslaved to track their pro­g ress and to strive ­toward their full task. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::113++0.1313815][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 113)

The most complex incentive systems stretched over the course of the year. In 1851, a Mississippi planter who owned forty-­n ine slaves explained his scheme. As he wrote, “I pay them money at the end of the year. . . . ​T he amount given to all depends on the crop and the price; the amount to each one upon his good be­hav­ior, his activity, obedience and efficiency during the year.” He allocated the payment by class: “The negro who has discharged all his duties through the year most faithfully is put in the first class. As many as deserve it are put ­there and all get the largest and same amount of Money. The amount paid them is lessened as they fall into lower classes.” Slaves could draw on their accounts throughout the year, and the planter furnished “any extra clothing that any of them may want,” charging their accounts, and “at pay day, as they call it, it is brought up against them.” ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::113++0.620871][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 113)

Economists and historians have disagreed about the source of t ­ hese gains in cotton productivity, with economists pointing to biological innovation—­ especially the adoption of new strains of cotton—­a nd historians putting greater emphasis on vio­lence ­toward enslaved ­people. 52 Plantation account books show that planters pursued both strategies in combination, weaving agricultural innovation and coercion together in strategies to grow more cotton. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::119++0.12012049999999999][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 119)

What plantation account books reveal is not just that cotton and corn were complementary but that they w ­ ere complementary by design. Among the most impor­tant of Francis Terry Leak’s calculations was his estimation of how he should divide his land between cotton and corn, a subject he com- mented on regularly. Leak’s account books show that the smoothing of ­labor was not simply a characteristic of the crops but a result of careful calcula- tions of when to plant and tend each. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::121++0.5990995][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 121)

Slavery made it pos­si­ble to turn years with exceptional crops into excep- tional profits. In a ­f ree ­labor economy, a cotton planter might not be able to recruit ­labor to bring in a rare bumper crop, which would likely coincide with high ­labor demand across a region. By contrast, ­under slavery, planters could plant more cotton with the assurance that they could command ­labor during the harvest. One such year was 1860, and some planters w ­ ere able to translate the large crop into massive profits. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::123++0.38138150000000004][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 123)

Systematic accounting practices thrived on antebellum plantations—­not despite slavery but ­because of it. The soft power of numbers complemented the intimidation of the whip and the threat of sale. Planters blended innovation, information, and vio­lence as they drove up the pace of ­labor, conducted experiments, and distributed incentives. On the pages of account books, the power of masters over slaves transformed men and w ­ omen into units of l ­ abor power, ­labor power into bales of cotton, and cotton into profit. Chapter 4 turns to a complementary set of calculations—of enslaved ­people’s value as capital. ­Here planters estimated not just how much work ­people could be expected to perform, but how much they ­were worth on the market as trad- able assets. Of course, the transformation of enslaved ­people into units of labor and units of capital was never complete; ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::137++0.46846849999999995][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 137)

n their attempts to value and price ­human capital, planters, southern in- dustrialists, and slave traders estimated the value of the enslaved in many dif­fer­ent ways. They began to speak the language of “depreciation” de­cades before it would become a common accounting technique, evaluating lives in much the same way that the railroads ­were beginning to value trains and tracks. Slave traders and auctioneers printed price lists and advertisements, grading slaves into standard categories. ­These schemes treated the enslaved like the commodities they grew, attempting to attribute value without ref- erence to specific individuals. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::139++0.228979][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 139)

Pricing lives was an alternation between the twin poles of standardiza- tion and individuality. Prices reflect standardization but also diversity and idiosyncrasy. For example, thirty-­one-­year-­old Annette’s value increased by $100 over the course of 1857. 10 The only clue to the cause is the birth of a baby in November—­perhaps the added value recognized her fertility. Or, take Frank and Ephraim, both eleven years old at the beginning of 1856. Their values had advanced in lockstep from birth, and at the beginning of the year, each was priced at $350. By the end of the year, however, Frank’s value had leapt to $450 compared to Ephraim’s at $400. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::143++0.533784][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 143)

Walter Johnson’s evocative history of slave markets, Soul by Soul, considers the aspirations of price lists to make h ­ uman beings “fully fungible.” In slave traders’ ­tables, “any slave, anywhere, could be compared to any other, any- where ­else.” ­These neat documents collapsed the infinite complexity of indi- vidual lives into a set of rough-­a nd-­ready categories. The prices made the incommensurable commensurable, enabling “even the most counter-­i ntuitive comparisons—­between the body of an old man and a ­little girl . . . ​or between the muscular arm of a field hand and the sharp eye of a seamstress, or, as many nineteenth-­century critics of slavery noted, between a ­human being and a mule.” As Johnson writes, “That was commodification: the distant and dif­fer­ent translated into money value and resolved into a single scale of rela- tive prices.” ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::156++0.46846849999999995][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 156)

of enslaved ­people advanced remarkably far considering the complexity and individuality of ­human assets. The genres of calculation described above all translated slaves into abstract units of value. Inventories rated their worth in dollars, price lists sorted them into categories, and the classification of frac- tional “hands” created a unit of h ­ uman value that allowed a diverse array of people to be compared and combined. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::166++0.6554055][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 166)

To form a basis for liquid ­f utures markets, pro­cesses for classifying com- modity goods also need to be routinized and generalized. That is, rating needs to take place the same way on a regular schedule, and to be widely accepted across society. H ­ ere the pro­cesses of commodification acting on enslaved people fall short. Some planters and traders rated enslaved ­people regularly— for example James Green Carson inventoried his slaves annually, using the same transparent scale to price ­children each year. But none of the systems of abstraction described h ­ ere came close to the transparent, widely ac- cepted, and well-­regulated grading practices that emerged for staple goods like wheat, cotton, and sugar. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::167++0.3596095][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 167)

made enslaved ­people more interchangeable. If not for the closing of the At- lantic slave trade in 1807 and the coming of the Civil War in 1861, futures markets might well have emerged. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::168++0.1433935][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 168)

But it would be misleading to suggest that planters pushed for standard prices and slaves strug­gled against them. Being a person with a price cut both ways. Even the rhe­toric of “pricelessness” could be turned to an own­er’s ad- vantage. This is most clear from bondpeople’s efforts to purchase themselves or to secure purchase by a preferred master. A slave pursuing manumission could not buy just any prime hand. A ­mother working to ­f ree her child could not simply pay the price for so many pounds of flesh. Planters buying ­labor could choose from many slaves, but a slave seeking freedom sought some- thing singular, and he or she had to negotiate with a monopolist. 84 Planters asserted their slaves’ value as commodities only when it was con­ve­n ient and profitable to do so. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::168++0.46846849999999995][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 168)

Lincoln’s “moderate estimate” was indeed too conservative. Economists have estimated that the nearly four million slaves who lived in the United States on the eve of the Civil War had a combined market capitalization of between ­ ere closer to $3.1 and $3.6 billion. 90 The states that seceded from the Union w this number when they argued for secession, triggering the beginning of the Civil War. On January 29, 1861, the state of Georgia offered a statement ex- plaining its reasons for leaving the Union: “Why? B ­ ecause by their declared princi­ples and policy” the northern states had “outlawed $3,000,000,000 of our property in the common territories of the Union.” 91 Mississippi offered an even higher estimate, writing that the property in slaves was “the greatest material interest of the world.” They seceded to prevent “the loss of property worth four billions of money” and to “secure this as well as e ­ very other species of property.” 92 Jefferson Davis simply put the risk at “thousands of millions of dollars.” 9 ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::170++0.2942945][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 170)

Property revealed its true nature: maintaining and growing capital had less to do with careful management than with politics. The risks that planters had sought to account for through their detailed calculations paled in compar- ison to the risk of outright expropriation. James Green Carson, the planter whose careful inventories opened this chapter, abandoned his estimates of deprecia- tion. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::171++0.533784][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 171)

Slaveholders understood that the value of enslaved property—­like all property—­was contingent on po­liti­cal circumstances. It depended on social and cultural expectations and—­most importantly—it depended on law. As Clay emphasized in his 1839 speech, “That is property which the law declares to be property.” ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::172++0.3596095][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 172)

Men, ­women, and ­children ­were complex and unpredictable assets. Pricing and appraisal—­ the most inhumane of activities—­were always inextricably human. Despite this, buyers, sellers, and traders i ­ magined pricing to be a rational exercise, and their rec­ords show how they used mea­sur­able charac- teristics and invisible punishments in order to constrain the opportunities for enslaved p ­ eople to shape the market. Though it often seems like slave- holders pushed for commodification and enslaved p ­ eople strug­gled against it, the real­ity was more complex and pernicious. Masters shifted between dif­fer­ent genres of valuation at their con­ve­n ience. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::173++0.2725225][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 173)

To some readers, the notion that slaveholders enjoyed extensive control over the men and w ­ omen they enslaved may seem obvious. However, my emphasis on control is at odds with much recent historical scholarship. For de­cades, historians have focused on masters’ lack of control, publishing out- standing research uncovering the vari­ous ways enslaved ­people eluded their owners. ­T hese studies of re­sis­tance, community, ­family, and culture have shown the myriad ways enslaved p ­ eople carved out spaces of their own in a system of extreme domination. 7 Appreciating the importance of this schol- arship requires an understanding of what came before. Studies of enslaved agency pushed back against a prior generation of research that emphasized domination, comparing plantations to concentration camps. The earlier gen- eration of scholarship suggested that slavery did long-­term damage to African American communities, families, and personalities. Among its claims was the notion that the system of slavery was infantilizing, creating certain per- sonality types. 8 That perspective, however outdated ­today, was also po­liti­ cally radical in its own moment: it blamed per­sis­tent in­equality not on racial inferiority but on slavery. 9 ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::210++0.31606599999999996][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 210)

Scientific man­ag­ers seem to have seen their own practices not as some- thing utterly disconnected from the history of slavery but as a strategic movement forward from it. Their rhe­toric was not always of distance but of pro­g ress. Gantt apparently “liked to say that scientific management marked a ­g reat step forward from slave ­labour.” 11 James Mapes Dodge, a Philadelphia manufacturer and early supporter of Taylor, explained in 1913 that “we cannot tell who first liberated the germ idea of Scientific Management, as it was born to the world in the first cry of anguish that escaped the lips of the lashed slave.” Dodge’s reference was meta­phorical, to a vague and distant past where slavery prevailed, not to the slave South. But he understood that “the pres­ent gen- eration” had inherited “from the past the relationship of master and slave” and saw it as the job of scientific management to move beyond it. 12 ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::219++0.12012049999999999][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 219)

Moving beyond denial requires not only an acknowl­edgment that slave- holders practiced a kind of scientific management but also a broader rethinking of deep-­seated assumptions about the relationship between capitalism and control. Though t ­ here are many exceptions, histories of business practices— at least ­those that reach a general audience—­tend to be both individual and social success stories. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::220++0.7732735][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 220)

d. Slavery shows how one par­tic­u­lar set of rules enabled precise management but paired its efficiencies with horrifying costs. Slavery also illustrates how certain kinds of market expansion—­a llowing lives to be bonded in l ­ abor and sold—­can produce radical in­equality. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::221++0.2507505][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 221)

Certain kinds of management flourish when man­ag­ers enjoy a high level of control over their workers. The rise of scientific management in the late nineteenth ­century should be seen both as a moment of innovation and as the reemergence of new circumstances of control. With the closing of the frontier, workers had fewer opportunities to leave the factory to return to the land. With immigration and rising in­equality, manufacturers enjoyed access to a plentiful l ­ abor supply. The age of trust and mono­poly limited outside options, and collusion meant that even when workers could legally go elsewhere, the circumstances ­were not necessarily better. Only in ­these circumstances did it make sense for man­ag­ers like Taylor to attempt to calcu- late “what fraction of a ­horse power a man power is,” with the expectation that this maximum rate of work could be acquired for an hourly wage, or perhaps a wage and a “bonus.” 23 ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::221++0.4466965][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 221)

Modern narratives of cap­i­tal­ist development often emphasize the posi- tive-­sum outcomes of many individual choices. They suggest that ­f ree, even selfish, decisions go hand in hand with growth and innovation. They also assume that vast wealth accumulated by a few accompanies improved cir- cumstances for many. The history of slavery’s capitalism warns against all these expectations. In the eigh­teenth and nineteenth centuries, slavery proved highly adaptable to the pursuit of profit. F ­ ree markets for slaveholders flour- ished, and their control over men, w ­ omen, and ­children expedited produc ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::221++0.7297295][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 221)

into massive fortunes—­both through financial maneuvering and through human reproduction. The power of capital to control labor was rarely more acutely felt than where labor was capital. ([[pdfview:/home/matt/BecomingModern/Reading/rosenthal-accounting-slavery.pdf::222++0.154655][rosenthal accounting slavery]], 222)






* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Photography & Mechanical Objectivity
Photography: the important part.

planographic lithography:

38: Lithogrpahy is based on the mutual repulsion of oil and water: a form of grease is used to mark a stone (or metal, e.g. zinc), whose surface is then dampened in all bu the marked partswhich repel the applied water. When a greasy printing ink is rolled over the stone, its oil is in turn repelled bu the damp parts of the surface but accepted by the greasy--hence try--ones, where it stands, ready for _tansfer_ (usually bu yse of "scraper press") to as many receiving paper surfaces as are pressed against it, so long as one re-inks it as necessary... Niepce had the idea of augmenting this new process with a second mechanical procedure: the ink-receptive marking oft he printing surface itself, which, like the traditional processes, was up to that point still done by hand.

So let's step back a moment and see what we have:

- one in a long line of machines aimed at reducing the laobur of
  drawing. Importance of, e.g., Niepce's sense of his own lack of
  drawing skill.
- use of sun's energy to drivethe labour of creeation -- in effect, to
  automate art. Compare with Watt's scupting machine or the automaton
  Babbage sees at the exhibition.
- The possibility of eternal recurrence of the same (Nietzsche) via
  Talbot's process.

But we also have a lot more, and I think I can put this into two parts:

1: printing and mechanical reproduction of images.

lithogrpahy and the hisotry of printing. use of lithography to make
plates for printing off of.

development of halftone process in 1910's: massive increase in scopeo f
photogrpahic reproduction.

photogrpahy as essential to birth of mass media

2. Photogrpahy as replacement for human subjectivity. Vision itself no
   longer perfectible. Statistical methods replaced by objective
   recordings (e.g. graphical method). Devices like the Zoetrope had
   shown how unreliable human vision was. Old idea of Camera Obscura --
   which connected the machine to the individual through a unified
   perspective or point of view -- disappeared in the photograph, whose
   view3point could be entirely distinct from any human individual's.
3. 
4. mechanical objectivity.

* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): TechnoScientific Aesthetics

Last week we talkerd about photogrpahy's various reelationships to
science: both the scientific, esp chemical, basis for the invention of
photography, and the use of photography in the pursuit of scientific
aims (e.g. various kinds of research); might have been good to talk
about extension of these methods into wide variety of scientific
instruments today (e.g., x-ray photography, crystallography, mass
spectrometry to a certain extent; cloud chambers, high-energy physics;
not to mention lithography & photolithography in circuit design).

Moreover, we also talked about photography as a technological system :
the system of mass or “mechanical” produciton of art (& all that this
makes possible in the late 19^{th}/early 20^{th} century).

While photography is tremendously important in the development of
modernity, it is by no means the only and perhaps not the most
interesting example of the intersection of art and science. Today I want
to discuss, without multimedia aids of any kind, the importance of
science and tecnology in two other media: painting and music. I'll try
to ocnvey a sense of the rich interpenetration of these disciplines with
scientific knowledge in thel ate 19^{th}/early 20^{th} cneturies.

Might want to start by making a somewhat arbitrary but useful
distinciton btwn method, form, and content in artistic production. Works
of art oftne have a manifest /content/, e.g. in painting they represent
a scene or an object; also have a idstinctive /form/ or genre; and
artists often adhere ot a /method/ of creating a work of art. Finally,
art takes place iwthin a /cultural milieu/ which encompasses or
interacts with other parts of culture.

How might science and technology enter into each of these domains?

Let's start with painting. Late c19 was z watershed in history of
painting ofr huge number of reasons which I'm not really ocmpetent to
lecture you about. Attention is usually drawn to emrgence of /modernism/
as a general trend in painting, and to /Impressionism/ as the
particular, well-bounded school of painting that marked the boundary
btwn modenr art and all that came before. A few reflections on the how,
why, and wherefore:

The canonical story, which I am unqualified to dispute, puts
Impressionism in opposition ot romantic painting, with its emphasis on
movement, drama, heroism, inner turmoil; and in alliance with Realism,
that is, with the attempt to document struggles of daily life.
(oposition is somewhat overstated of course, as e.g it is precisely
Romanticism that introduces the ordinary person as a subject of art...).
But certainly Impressionist paintings, with their vivid detail of
relatively static ando rdinary scenes, do offer a strong contrast to
Romanticism. Imprewsionism also inaugurated an obsession with formal
ocncerns -- with technique, with color, with materials, that is, with
artisitc elements in principle abstracted from the content of a work of
art -- that characterized much of what we now call “modern” art.

The impressionist movement, which encompasssed a fairly wide variety of
styles and subjects, was centred in Paris and was most prominent during
the period 1874-1886, during which time there were 6 “Impressionist
Exhibitions”, at which works were displayed by Manet, Monet, Renoir,
Cézanne, Gauguin, Degas, Pissarro, and about a dozen others. It is
impossible ot avoid at least some familiarity witht hese images as they
have become perhaps the safest of all works of art: unintrusive,
harmless, the material for calendars and postcards. In the earliest days
of Impressionism's notoriety, of course, this was not the case.
Impressionism was considered dangerous on a number of fronts:

(from clark, p.259): None of them appears to posses the sense of the
picture. They make fragments; they confine themselves to certain
specialities of observation; they have familiarized themselves with only
certain corners of humanity, the most striking in their display of
corruption. They have above al l he sense of the immoral woman. ... one
gets frightful gesticulations of filles perdues. The deliberately keep
company with the demented... etc.

Though we see their paintings as quaint, the subjects of impressionism
were often experienced as subversive. eAnd where for us the style of
their paintings is in some sense classical (undangerous), the it could
earlier be perceived as dangerous, even terrifying. Impsessionism
renders details as swatches of color, so that the illusionistic effect
of the painting dissipates as one approaches it. This toying with the
sense of reality oculd be profoundly dsiturbing for ocntemporaries....

Impressionism was followed in Frnace by “Post-impresisonism,” another
first (first “post”0 for French art/theory... Now, the
Post-Impressionists differed from the Impressionists in their often
rigorous adherence to principleso f composition. It was the PI's who
developed “pointillism”.... Seurat is the most famous: flecks of color
combine....

After the Post_impressionists the whole machine of Modern Art begins to
swing into action, with movements like Cubism, Dada, futurism,
expressionism, etc. in the early part of c. 20.

Nowl ooking at these paintings its hard to see why we'd be interested in
them from the p.o.v. of Science/technology. Any ideas?

Content: no sci...

Form: not technological objects per se (llike photography)

Methods: this is the trick. cf. ... what? Theory of Vision. then cf.
also Bob's stuff aboutt he aesthetic protractor.

Schoenberg:

web of ideas in late-century Vienna. How to relate the arts to the
sciences? Modernism sometimes seen as assertion of art as an independent
realm -- Impressionism e.g. perhaps last gasp of an art which ties
itself to notions of objective reality mediated by scientific
conceptions thereof. Dada, Futurism, Expressionism, imagine an art tied
down only by its own mandates.

In music, Schoenberg the quintessential avant-gardist, often thought of
as the ocmposer who abandoned aesthetics and and common-sense or
scientific notion of what sounds good, and developed his own absurd
ideas on this topic. so seems to support this idea of an
independently-evolving art sep. from science.

Bbut in fact believed his was an evolutionary and scientifically-based
aesthetics.

1. Helmholtz's theory of consonance: aesthetic sensation reduced to a
   physical one.
2. Mach's theory of knowledge

   1. no claims about external world --> onpy have knowledge of
      sensations. (psychophysics)
   2. mind and its ideas evolved along with the organism; adaptation to
      environment.
   3. mind aided by use of tools; tools helped to expand our worldo f
      sensation, hence increasing reach of undersetanding
   4. all this leads to a unity of science.

dissonance as matter of degree; mental energy, abstraction;

1. Music for the workers. rejection of “harmonic hierarchy of tones,
   makes all 12 tones be playd equal number of times, seems socialist.
   (Bolshevik).
2. “My personal feeling is htat music conveys a prophetic meaning
   revealing a higher form of life towards which mankind evolves...”:

“laws of art evolving in complementarity w/ sensory organs.”

Mach: plasticity of sensory organs.

* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Relativity + Some notes on war
Points to inseert re: einstein and poincare:

poincare: problem of michelson morley. Lorentz's time and space
contractions. Problem of dealing with it. conventianalism: choosing btwn
mathematicla representations.

p.318: “for Poincar'e space and time were pinned to the rigorous surface
of objective relations built to meet our human need for a frnankly
psychologicaol, objective, and simple ocnvenience. His was a relentless
Third Republic secularism. ii

By contrast, Einstein did not think that theory had fulfilled its task
by successfully and o nveniently capturing true relations among
phenomena.

Here were two great modernisms of physics, two ferociously ambitious
attempts to grasp the world in itrs totality. Poincar'es modernism
advanced by establishing objective, simple, convenient, and true
relations down to the smallest white space. Einstein's moved forward by
chiseling out a theory that aspired to capture the phenomena, not just
in predictions, but in its underliying structures. One was constructive,
building up to a complexity that would capture the structural relations
of thr,d. The other was more critical, more willing to set aside
complexity in order to grasp, austerely, those principles that rdflected
the govberning natural order.

Einstein's demonstration:

what is legth? Rigid rods. What is pace? Co-ordinate system of such
rods.

What is time? No real answer. What is simultaneity? Events are
simulatneous when two synchronized clcks at different locations in a
given reference frame register (light emanating from) those events at
times which differ solely by light-distance separating the observer from
the event.

2 postulates: things the same in all reference frames.

speed of light same in all ref frames.

From this derive that galilen relativitiy can't be right. instead,
einsteinian

From Relativity to War:

From Modernity to High Modernism:

Have discussed 3M's extensively in this class:

Modernization: technical/economic change to modern state

Modernity: state of being modern

Modernism: attitude towards modernity, approving and revelling in it.
Mark Twain: modernist.

In Art History and increasingly in history of Philosphy, Science, talk
about “High Modernism”, period asfter WWI. cf. James Joyce, /Ulysses/:
Probes language itself. Takes medium as object of inquiry, increasingly
/abstract/ed from the empirical world. A certain fundamentajlism and
concern with form over content.

Seems clear that the modernism we're talking about in most of this
course is difficult to hook up with this latter version of modernism.
/Abstraction/ not a characteristic of Babbage, Faust, Kelvin, Helmholtz,
Mark Twain, others*. But is it possible that there might be a
connection, in fact?

Logical Positivism

Hogh modernism in philosophy (of science) associated most centrally with
so-called Vienna Circle & Logical Positivism (descends from Comte via
Ernst Mach, but that's not important right now). What is important is
that modern analytic philosophy is union of Bertrand Russell and Log
Pos.

-for logical positivism, sciencei s purely abstract enterprise, as
system of /statements/ which followed certain logical rules, and were
strictly “verifiable”. Come into contact with material world solely
through so-called “observation statements” which translate the data of
the senses into /propositions/ which can be used to determine whether
some other proposition was true or false.

*Scientific knowledge is objective solely in virtue of its formal or
structural properties. So, modernism in phil sci associated with effort
to create an enormous gap between form and content, and also between the
world of ordinary experience and the world of science. While the first
may be disorderly, ocnfused, and inextricably material, the latter was
not only ordered by strictly */*geistig*/*, immaterial, nad bound only
by the rules of logic (themselves relatively new) *

Relativity

Why am I telling you this? Hero of LP was Einstein, esp. 1905 “On the
Electodynamics of Moving Bodies”.

Paper seems incredibly abstract, beautiful piece of logic which rids
science of metaphysical leftovers of our own daily experience.

E&M: luminiferous ether. Wave theory. Absolute space and time.

cf. space, time contraction associated with the railroad and telegraph.
Holds onto an objective reality beyond our subjective experience.

Important scientific reasons to believe in ether: wave thy again. But
hard to understand, also hard to detect. Lorentz contraction, maybe
matter is constituted fundamentally bey the ether

Einstein: deduce from concancy of c, def'n of synchronicity, the
cotraction of space and (!) dilation of time.

-no fancy math (almost), no more postulates, no opnobservable
substances.

-result: when move fast, objects compress, time appears to diklate. NO
OBJECTIVE TIME OR SPACE

point 1: note how cool this is.

Point 2: note how abstract it seems

Now compare with galison's account of railroad time in this era.

Moral equivalence:

war. Technological apotheosis of 20^{th} century. Thermodynamics of
social organization. What's it mean to “convert” war into peace? War
time Utopia. Is there a way other than hyperrationalism? Alaso when eis
hyperrationalism a cover for particualrist values?

Think of this analysis of modernity as beginning of long effort to come
to grips with our current situation through a critical understanding of
s, t, and the way in which they construct both large-scale structures
and the fine-=grained consistency of our daily lives.

In the more or less s ocialistic future towards which mankind seems [to
be] drifting we must still subject ourselves collectively to those
severities which answer to our real position upon this only partly
hospitable globe. We must make new energies and hardihoods continue the
manliness to which the military mind so faithfully clings. Martial
virtues must be the enduring cement; intrepidity, contempt of softness,
surrender of private interest, obedience to command, must still remain
the rock upon which states are built...

* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): H. G. Wells, the Future, and Futurism

I'll argue today that H.G. Wells invented the future. Obviously in order
to do so I need to narrow down my definition of the future
substantially...

** H.G. Wells, Scientific Romance, and the Invention of the Future
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: h.g.-wells-scientific-romance-and-the-invention-of-the-future
   :END:

*** The Utopian Tradition of Futurity
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: the-utopian-tradition-of-futurity
    :END:

***** We can think of several ways in which the Future has operated in
the course thus far. The very notion of Progress is necessarily
future-oriented, and from Condorcet's “Stages” onwards we've seen many
visions of a future perfection of society. For these scientists of the
social realm, the future is in a sense a /mere, perhaps trivial,
consequence of the present tendency towards progress/ -- a /principle
/of advancement which we can already see operating in the present.
Engineers like James Watt, or later Robert Fulton, Oliver Heaviside,
etc., imagine a futurity of endless technical innovation mainly as part
of their vision of the present. So for the progress-boosters, the future
is /part of their sense of present possibilities; /but is mostly taken
for granted, and not an object of much extended contemplation. Closely
allied to the pure progress-boosters are the Utopians, whose
relationship to the future is slightly different. For Utopians, the
future is much more central to their mode of existence -- indeed, the
future is far more important than the present. All actions undertaken
today are aimed at the creation of a (perfect) future world which hone
may or may not inhabit oneself. Thus the outsized emphasis on the
particularities of the Utopian future, the lists of characteristics,
institutional apparatuses, social positions &c: the Future is the main
site of the Utopians' intellectual engagement. The Hegelian tradition
sits somewhere between these two: it refuses to give a full detailed
account of life in the future, but, like the Utopians, \Hegel and Marx
see the jfuture state as the /telos/ of present-day life activity. In
this Hegel, Marx, and the Utopians have a strong resonance with the
Abrahamic tradition of holy prophecy -- in which the concern with
/telos/ is absolutely central. So obviously there are many versions of
the future operative in the 19^{th} century. But I'm going ot suggest
that Wells's /Time Machine/ brings to prominence new resonencas to that
concept.
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: we-can-think-of-several-ways-in-which-the-future-has-operated-in-the-course-thus-far.-the-very-notion-of-progress-is-necessarily-future-oriented-and-from-condorcets-stages-onwards-weve-seen-many-visions-of-a-future-perfection-of-society.-for-these-scientists-of-the-social-realm-the-future-is-in-a-sense-a-mere-perhaps-trivial-consequence-of-the-present-tendency-towards-progress-a-principle-of-advancement-which-we-can-already-see-operating-in-the-present.-engineers-like-james-watt-or-later-robert-fulton-oliver-heaviside-etc.-imagine-a-futurity-of-endless-technical-innovation-mainly-as-part-of-their-vision-of-the-present.-so-for-the-progress-boosters-the-future-is-part-of-their-sense-of-present-possibilities-but-is-mostly-taken-for-granted-and-not-an-object-of-much-extended-contemplation.-closely-allied-to-the-pure-progress-boosters-are-the-utopians-whose-relationship-to-the-future-is-slightly-different.-for-utopians-the-future-is-much-more-central-to-their-mode-of-existence-indeed-the-future-is-far-more-important-than-the-present.-all-actions-undertaken-today-are-aimed-at-the-creation-of-a-perfect-future-world-which-hone-may-or-may-not-inhabit-oneself.-thus-the-outsized-emphasis-on-the-particularities-of-the-utopian-future-the-lists-of-characteristics-institutional-apparatuses-social-positions-c-the-future-is-the-main-site-of-the-utopians-intellectual-engagement.-the-hegelian-tradition-sits-somewhere-between-these-two-it-refuses-to-give-a-full-detailed-account-of-life-in-the-future-but-like-the-utopians-hegel-and-marx-see-the-jfuture-state-as-the-telos-of-present-day-life-activity.-in-this-hegel-marx-and-the-utopians-have-a-strong-resonance-with-the-abrahamic-tradition-of-holy-prophecy-in-which-the-concern-with-telos-is-absolutely-central.-so-obviously-there-are-many-versions-of-the-future-operative-in-the-19th-century.-but-im-going-ot-suggest-that-wellss-time-machine-brings-to-prominence-new-resonencas-to-that-concept.
      :END:

*** Jules Verne's Scientific Adventure Stories
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: jules-vernes-scientific-adventure-stories
    :END:

***** Of course, Wells was by no means the first to write fiction based
in the future -- even excepting the Utopians like Cabet, or later,
Bellamy's /Looking Backward/. The most famous writer of scientific
romances in the years before Wells' career was the French novelist Jules
Verne (1828-1905). Born in Nantes the eldest of attorney Poierre Verne's
5 children, Verne's early forays into writing were c ut short when his
father withdrew financial support for his sons failing studies, forcing
the young Jules to make a living as a stockbroker (poor guy). But in the
1860's, in his mid-30's, Verne began to publish a series of adventure
stories which made him famous all over the world. These stories, most
famously /Voyage to the Centre of the Eearth/ (1863), /From the Earth to
the Moon/ (1865), /20,000 Leagues under the Sea/ (1870), and /Around the
World in 80 Days/ (1872), were adventure novels which shared much in
common with e.g. the works of his contemporary Alexandre Dumas, or, in a
somewhat less sophisticated vein, the English “Penny Dreadfuls” --
stories of imperial exploration, individual and racial heroism, and
sublimated sexual romance, intended for teenaged boys of doubtful
morals. But unlike these works, Verne's books gave a central role to
/science/ and above all /technology/. So e.g. 20,000 Leagues centres on
a submarine; /Earth to the Moon/ on a giant cannonball; /Voyage ot the
Centre/ on special lamps that allow the protagonists to descend through
a giant volcano into the very bowels of the globe. In this
techno-fascination Verne was influenced especially by Edgar Allan Poe,
who, you'll remember, had written e.g. a story about the chess-playing
Turk. These works might be seen largely as /heroic celebrations of
technology/ embedded in a story replete with both lurid adventures and,
perhaps surprisingly, sophisticated political discussions ocncerning the
impact and importance of learning and technical expertise (these were
largely omitted from early English translations of these works). The
importance of Verne's politics should not be underestimated, as he
became quite enamoured of the writings of Pyoter Kropotkin later in his
life (and wrot about communitarian themes).
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: of-course-wells-was-by-no-means-the-first-to-write-fiction-based-in-the-future-even-excepting-the-utopians-like-cabet-or-later-bellamys-looking-backward.-the-most-famous-writer-of-scientific-romances-in-the-years-before-wells-career-was-the-french-novelist-jules-verne-1828-1905.-born-in-nantes-the-eldest-of-attorney-poierre-vernes-5-children-vernes-early-forays-into-writing-were-c-ut-short-when-his-father-withdrew-financial-support-for-his-sons-failing-studies-forcing-the-young-jules-to-make-a-living-as-a-stockbroker-poor-guy.-but-in-the-1860s-in-his-mid-30s-verne-began-to-publish-a-series-of-adventure-stories-which-made-him-famous-all-over-the-world.-these-stories-most-famously-voyage-to-the-centre-of-the-eearth-1863-from-the-earth-to-the-moon-1865-20000-leagues-under-the-sea-1870-and-around-the-world-in-80-days-1872-were-adventure-novels-which-shared-much-in-common-with-e.g.-the-works-of-his-contemporary-alexandre-dumas-or-in-a-somewhat-less-sophisticated-vein-the-english-penny-dreadfuls----stories-of-imperial-exploration-individual-and-racial-heroism-and-sublimated-sexual-romance-intended-for-teenaged-boys-of-doubtful-morals.-but-unlike-these-works-vernes-books-gave-a-central-role-to-science-and-above-all-technology.-so-e.g.-20000-leagues-centres-on-a-submarine-earth-to-the-moon-on-a-giant-cannonball-voyage-ot-the-centre-on-special-lamps-that-allow-the-protagonists-to-descend-through-a-giant-volcano-into-the-very-bowels-of-the-globe.-in-this-techno-fascination-verne-was-influenced-especially-by-edgar-allan-poe-who-youll-remember-had-written-e.g.-a-story-about-the-chess-playing-turk.-these-works-might-be-seen-largely-as-heroic-celebrations-of-technology-embedded-in-a-story-replete-with-both-lurid-adventures-and-perhaps-surprisingly-sophisticated-political-discussions-ocncerning-the-impact-and-importance-of-learning-and-technical-expertise-these-were-largely-omitted-from-early-english-translations-of-these-works.-the-importance-of-vernes-politics-should-not-be-underestimated-as-he-became-quite-enamoured-of-the-writings-of-pyoter-kropotkin-later-in-his-life-and-wrot-about-communitarian-themes.
      :END:

***** Verne prided himself on writing /realistic/ works of fiction based
on plausible scientific premises; hefamously compared himself favourably
to Wells, writing, about the /Earth to the Moon/,
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: verne-prided-himself-on-writing-realistic-works-of-fiction-based-on-plausible-scientific-premises-hefamously-compared-himself-favourably-to-wells-writing-about-the-earth-to-the-moon
      :END:

“His books were sent to me, and I have read them. It is very curious,
and, I will add, very English. But I do not see the possibility of
comparison between his work and mine. We do not proceed in the same
manner. It occurs to me that his stories do not repose on very
scientific bases. No, there is no /rapport/ between his work and mine. I
make use of physics. He invents. I go to the moon in a cannon-ball,
discharged from a cannon. Here there is no invention. He goes to Mars in
an airship, which he constructs of a metal which does away with the law
of gravitation. /Ça c'est très joli/, but show me this metal. Let him
produce it.”

Jules Verne, 9 October, 1903

***** 
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: section
      :END:

***** !” So Verne's Scientific Adventures, which unquestionably helped
to launch the genre of science fiction, had mostly /conventional
/themes, with the exception that /technologies acted almost as
characters in these novels. /Thus, despite their manifest importance, I
tend to regard these novels as rather less interestingand innovative
than e.g. the phantasmagoria of the Romantics, or of /Frankenstein. /
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: so-vernes-scientific-adventures-which-unquestionably-helped-to-launch-the-genre-of-science-fiction-had-mostly-conventional-themes-with-the-exception-that-technologies-acted-almost-as-characters-in-these-novels.-thus-despite-their-manifest-importance-i-tend-to-regard-these-novels-as-rather-less-interestingand-innovative-than-e.g.-the-phantasmagoria-of-the-romantics-or-of-frankenstein.
      :END:

*** Wells' Biography
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: wells-biography
    :END:

***** [largely drawn from Ruddick, ed, /The Time Machine/]
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: largely-drawn-from-ruddick-ed-the-time-machine
      :END:

**** Early Life
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: early-life
     :END:

***** Herbert George Wells (1866-1946) -- or Bertie, as his mother
called him -- was something else again. Born 7 years after the
publication of /Origin of Species,/ Wells was the 3^{rd}/yongest son of
Joswph and Sarah Wells. His mother was a lady's maid, his father a
shopkeeper; Wells grew up in the lowest ranks of the British middle
class. This had both social and economic consequences; the opportunities
of rank that presented themselvdes e.g. to Charles Darwin were not open
to Wells; and the family's income was relatively meagre. Apprenticed
twice to a draper, Wells escaped this destiny of eternal boredom by
winning a scholarship to the Normal School in London, whee he trained as
a secondary sch0ool science teacher. [contrast Darwin and Wells]. In
1884, his first year, Wells attended lectures by T.H. Huxley, whom he
greatly admired for the rest of his life. By his third year HGW was
increasingly interested in socialist politics, fhaving heard GB Shaw and
William Morris speak on the topic, and decreasingly interested in his
studies, which he flunked. He ehad been given a chance to rise above his
class, and also to acquire a first-rate scientific training; and he had
blown it. For the next decade he would barely eke out a living, first as
a science teacher at a miserable private school, and then, after a
soccer accident left him coughing up blood (continuedo n and off for the
next 12 years!), as a tutor teaching University students how to cram for
their courses. His first economic success was a “Text-Book of Biology”
form this period; but after his lungs hemorraged in 1893, he turned to
popular journalism, which would provide the basis of his reputation form
that time onwards. [in his time HGW was known as much for his politicla
and social ocmmentary, and popular hisotries, as for his scientific
romances.]
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: herbert-george-wells-1866-1946-or-bertie-as-his-mother-called-him-was-something-else-again.-born-7-years-after-the-publication-of-origin-of-species-wells-was-the-3rdyongest-son-of-joswph-and-sarah-wells.-his-mother-was-a-ladys-maid-his-father-a-shopkeeper-wells-grew-up-in-the-lowest-ranks-of-the-british-middle-class.-this-had-both-social-and-economic-consequences-the-opportunities-of-rank-that-presented-themselvdes-e.g.-to-charles-darwin-were-not-open-to-wells-and-the-familys-income-was-relatively-meagre.-apprenticed-twice-to-a-draper-wells-escaped-this-destiny-of-eternal-boredom-by-winning-a-scholarship-to-the-normal-school-in-london-whee-he-trained-as-a-secondary-sch0ool-science-teacher.-contrast-darwin-and-wells.-in-1884-his-first-year-wells-attended-lectures-by-t.h.-huxley-whom-he-greatly-admired-for-the-rest-of-his-life.-by-his-third-year-hgw-was-increasingly-interested-in-socialist-politics-fhaving-heard-gb-shaw-and-william-morris-speak-on-the-topic-and-decreasingly-interested-in-his-studies-which-he-flunked.-he-ehad-been-given-a-chance-to-rise-above-his-class-and-also-to-acquire-a-first-rate-scientific-training-and-he-had-blown-it.-for-the-next-decade-he-would-barely-eke-out-a-living-first-as-a-science-teacher-at-a-miserable-private-school-and-then-after-a-soccer-accident-left-him-coughing-up-blood-continuedo-n-and-off-for-the-next-12-years-as-a-tutor-teaching-university-students-how-to-cram-for-their-courses.-his-first-economic-success-was-a-text-book-of-biology-form-this-period-but-after-his-lungs-hemorraged-in-1893-he-turned-to-popular-journalism-which-would-provide-the-basis-of-his-reputation-form-that-time-onwards.-in-his-time-hgw-was-known-as-much-for-his-politicla-and-social-ocmmentary-and-popular-hisotries-as-for-his-scientific-romances.
      :END:

***** Having married a cousin in 1891, he eloped with a University
student in 1894, divorcing and remarryingi n 1895 in the first of many
infatuations with younger women. The book you read, /The Time Machine/,
also dates from this year, and marks a dramatic rise in Welss' status as
a writer.
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: having-married-a-cousin-in-1891-he-eloped-with-a-university-student-in-1894-divorcing-and-remarryingi-n-1895-in-the-first-of-many-infatuations-with-younger-women.-the-book-you-read-the-time-machine-also-dates-from-this-year-and-marks-a-dramatic-rise-in-welss-status-as-a-writer.
      :END:

**** Professional Success
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: professional-success
     :END:

***** Wells' meteoric rise to one of the pre-eminent writers and
commentators of the early c.20, in addition to being accompanied by a
dramatic increase in wealth, had several consequences for him and for
us:
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: wells-meteoric-rise-to-one-of-the-pre-eminent-writers-and-commentators-of-the-early-c.20-in-addition-to-being-accompanied-by-a-dramatic-increase-in-wealth-had-several-consequences-for-him-and-for-us
      :END:

***** 
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: section-1
      :END:

- 

  - ***** hailed as a prophet, Wells was's work became increasingly
    self-conscious and, perhaps, less interesting, as his career
    progressed. Thus his early 'scientific romances' have survived to
    this day as his Utopian novels have not.
          :PROPERTIES:
          :CUSTOM_ID: hailed-as-a-prophet-wells-wass-work-became-increasingly-self-conscious-and-perhaps-less-interesting-as-his-career-progressed.-thus-his-early-scientific-romances-have-survived-to-this-day-as-his-utopian-novels-have-not.
          :END:

  - ***** as a celebrity, Wells's tumultuous personal life assumed
    scandalous proportions, and not only insinuated its way into his
    writings (which in some places included transparent extolments of
    free love), but tainted his political leanings...
          :PROPERTIES:
          :CUSTOM_ID: as-a-celebrity-wellss-tumultuous-personal-life-assumed-scandalous-proportions-and-not-only-insinuated-its-way-into-his-writings-which-in-some-places-included-transparent-extolments-of-free-love-but-tainted-his-political-leanings...
          :END:

*** Wells' Politics and Utopian Ideals
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: wells-politics-and-utopian-ideals
    :END:

***** Already mentioned that Verne had political ambtions; Wells also,
ran unsuccsessfully for parliament 2 times. Had a long and tumultuous
relaitonship with the Fabian Society, influential group of British
Socialists, whose history is relevant here.
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: already-mentioned-that-verne-had-political-ambtions-wells-also-ran-unsuccsessfully-for-parliament-2-times.-had-a-long-and-tumultuous-relaitonship-with-the-fabian-society-influential-group-of-british-socialists-whose-history-is-relevant-here.
      :END:

- 

  - ***** founded 1884, i.e. when Wells moved to London; prominent
    members included GB Shaw, Havelock Ellis, and later many prominent
    artistic and political figures, e.g. Emmeline Pankhurst,
    Sidney/Beatrice Webb (who ran the society for many years), EB
    Nesbit, Bertrand Russell, the Huxley Brothers, Margaret Sanger, and
    many others. Named after Quintus Fabius Maximmus Cuncator (Roman
    general) and faovured non-revolutionary, subversive tactics.
          :PROPERTIES:
          :CUSTOM_ID: founded-1884-i.e.-when-wells-moved-to-london-prominent-members-included-gb-shaw-havelock-ellis-and-later-many-prominent-artistic-and-political-figures-e.g.-emmeline-pankhurst-sidneybeatrice-webb-who-ran-the-society-for-many-years-eb-nesbit-bertrand-russell-the-huxley-brothers-margaret-sanger-and-many-others.-named-after-quintus-fabius-maximmus-cuncator-roman-general-and-faovured-non-revolutionary-subversive-tactics.
          :END:

  - ***** - vision of socialism rather vague, & centred on /state
    planning by an elite/ rather than spontaneous mass revolution...
    Rather diverse set of figures, e.g. Russell who would becvome a
    Communist, Wells, Huxley's, Sanger, who were very strongly motivated
    by findings form biology; and esp. the Webbs, who imagined a
    bureaucrat- planned and -run State.
          :PROPERTIES:
          :CUSTOM_ID: vision-of-socialism-rather-vague-centred-on-state-planning-by-an-elite-rather-than-spontaneous-mass-revolution...-rather-diverse-set-of-figures-e.g.-russell-who-would-becvome-a-communist-wells-huxleys-sanger-who-were-very-strongly-motivated-by-findings-form-biology-and-esp.-the-webbs-who-imagined-a-bureaucrat--planned-and--run-state.
          :END:

***** Wells joined the Society in 1903, andi n '05 published /A Modern
Utopia/ which laid out a positive vision of a socialist Utopia -- a
society in which a rationalistic caste of “Samurai” practiced a
merciless negative eugenics , modernized the technical infrastrcuture,
and oversaw the distribution of material goods.; also Free Love [cf.
Wells' own life].
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: wells-joined-the-society-in-1903-andi-n-05-published-a-modern-utopia-which-laid-out-a-positive-vision-of-a-socialist-utopia-a-society-in-which-a-rationalistic-caste-of-samurai-practiced-a-merciless-negative-eugenics-modernized-the-technical-infrastrcuture-and-oversaw-the-distribution-of-material-goods.-also-free-love-cf.-wells-own-life.
      :END:

- 

  - ***** association btwn his free love views and the society; struggle
    for ocntrol; ouster in 1908.
          :PROPERTIES:
          :CUSTOM_ID: association-btwn-his-free-love-views-and-the-society-struggle-for-ocntrol-ouster-in-1908.
          :END:

  - ***** Wells' Utopia: A technocratic society bound together by a
    self-generated Will to Collective Welfare, dedicated to the
    /biological improvement of the race/.
          :PROPERTIES:
          :CUSTOM_ID: wells-utopia-a-technocratic-society-bound-together-by-a-self-generated-will-to-collective-welfare-dedicated-to-the-biological-improvement-of-the-race.
          :END:

  - ***** Esential to see EUGENICS as a fundamental element of Wells's
    thought, c.f his comments on Galton... cf. relaitonship to Sanger
    (1912ff?), and his thoughts on war.
          :PROPERTIES:
          :CUSTOM_ID: esential-to-see-eugenics-as-a-fundamental-element-of-wellss-thought-c.f-his-comments-on-galton...-cf.-relaitonship-to-sanger-1912ff-and-his-thoughts-on-war.
          :END:

*** The Future as Scientific Mythos
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: the-future-as-scientific-mythos
    :END:

***** All of this is prelude to a real discussion of TM :
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: all-of-this-is-prelude-to-a-real-discussion-of-tm
      :END:

- 

  - ***** new and different funciton ofr futurity: future as a great
    space of visonary exploration, parchment on which a kind of virtual
    scientific dexperiment can be carried out. not the practical future,
    nor the mere inevitable rise or decline of Condorcet or Thompson;
    but instead an active and creative mode of experimental thought.
    Where Frankenstein was in some ways mere horror, and Verne mere
    enthusiasm, Wells at his best opens up the possibility of a a
    /speculativeand philosophical fiction/ exploring the transformations
    of human subjectivity, human nature, human biology, that might be
    wrought by science and technology. This is the legacy we should
    cherish in this work.
          :PROPERTIES:
          :CUSTOM_ID: new-and-different-funciton-ofr-futurity-future-as-a-great-space-of-visonary-exploration-parchment-on-which-a-kind-of-virtual-scientific-dexperiment-can-be-carried-out.-not-the-practical-future-nor-the-mere-inevitable-rise-or-decline-of-condorcet-or-thompson-but-instead-an-active-and-creative-mode-of-experimental-thought.-where-frankenstein-was-in-some-ways-mere-horror-and-verne-mere-enthusiasm-wells-at-his-best-opens-up-the-possibility-of-a-a-speculativeand-philosophical-fiction-exploring-the-transformations-of-human-subjectivity-human-nature-human-biology-that-might-be-wrought-by-science-and-technology.-this-is-the-legacy-we-should-cherish-in-this-work.
          :END:

  - ***** That said, what's the TM fabout?
          :PROPERTIES:
          :CUSTOM_ID: that-said-whats-the-tm-fabout
          :END:

  - ***** Class struggle!
          :PROPERTIES:
          :CUSTOM_ID: class-struggle
          :END:

  - ***** Evolution and Degeneration!
          :PROPERTIES:
          :CUSTOM_ID: evolution-and-degeneration
          :END:

  - ***** Failure of Planning!
          :PROPERTIES:
          :CUSTOM_ID: failure-of-planning
          :END:

  - ***** Time itseelf!!!!
          :PROPERTIES:
          :CUSTOM_ID: time-itseelf
          :END:

*** Dimensions of Time
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: dimensions-of-time
    :END:

**** physical
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: physical
     :END:

***** time as 4^{th} dimension. Idea of multiple dimensionality.
Flatland. 1884 pamphelet, “Whati s the Fourth Dimension” (c.h.
hinton)”four-dimensional space” (Nature 1885, time-space). Oscar Wilde,
“Canterville Ghost”
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: time-as-4th-dimension.-idea-of-multiple-dimensionality.-flatland.-1884-pamphelet-whati-s-the-fourth-dimension-c.h.-hintonfour-dimensional-space-nature-1885-time-space.-oscar-wilde-canterville-ghost
      :END:

**** psychological
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: psychological
     :END:

***** ocntinuity of ocnsciousness. James on time: “Perception of Time in
/Principleso f Psych/
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: ocntinuity-of-ocnsciousness.-james-on-time-perception-of-time-in-principleso-f-psych
      :END:

***** “The practically cognized preseent is no knife-edge, but a
saddle-back with a certain breadth of its own on which we sit perched,
and from which we look in 2 directions into time.... unit of ocmposition
of our perception of time is a /duration/, with a bow and a stern....
[then later: imagine we see 10,000 events in a second; or reversed,
1000^{th} part of an event... psych aspecto f duration. problem of
constancy fand change.] Also entropy....
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: the-practically-cognized-preseent-is-no-knife-edge-but-a-saddle-back-with-a-certain-breadth-of-its-own-on-which-we-sit-perched-and-from-which-we-look-in-2-directions-into-time....-unit-of-ocmposition-of-our-perception-of-time-is-a-duration-with-a-bow-and-a-stern....-then-later-imagine-we-see-10000-events-in-a-second-or-reversed-1000th-part-of-an-event...-psych-aspecto-f-duration.-problem-of-constancy-fand-change.-also-entropy....
      :END:

**** physiological
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: physiological
     :END:

ooking at his writings across an incredibly prolific career, it was not
machines, but biology and ecology that were central, at all different
scales of the world, from cellular to individual to species to planet.
The biological was the plastic, malleable component of the physical
world. As one who campaigned ceaselessly for an intentional, directed
“discovery of the future,” the biological was the preferred medium for
intervention. Recasting of the past, intervening in the present, and
inventing the future, was of course for Wells carried out in narrative
form. It is this narrative recasting of the biological as the medium of
time and action that we examine today. We have been drawn to H.G. Wells
from the opposite ends of his career. Between his early writings in the
1890s and his late attempts in the 1930s and 40s to envision the
ecological management of the world, the work goes through a trajectory
that starts with the individual body as the chosen site of intervention
and slowly moves out to encompass the world.

However, as the narrator of /The New Accelerator/ says, there is
actually no better way to portray the effects of the potion than to
describe the experience of taking it, and there is no better way to
formulate a sense of a biologically digested narrative time than to take
a close look at Wells' writing. Let us return to the story.

***** *“I must warn you in the first place as soon as you've got it down
to shut your eyes, and open them very cautiously in a minute or so's
time. One still sees...but there's a kind of shock to the retina, a
nasty giddy confusion just at the time if the eyes are open. Keep ‘em
shut.”*
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: i-must-warn-you-in-the-first-place-as-soon-as-youve-got-it-down-to-shut-your-eyes-and-open-them-very-cautiously-in-a-minute-or-sos-time.-one-still-seesbut-theres-a-kind-of-shock-to-the-retina-a-nasty-giddy-confusion-just-at-the-time-if-the-eyes-are-open.-keep-em-shut.
      :END:

***** 
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: section-2
      :END:

***** Throughout the story, the act of “dodging into the interstices of
time” is intimately related to that important physiological (and
philosophical) unit of time, the blink of an eye. The transformation
happening behind the closed eyelids of the narrator is measured in terms
of other blinks, winks and twinkles. All that he does while the potion
is working, happens, as far as the rest of the world is concerned, “in
the twinkling of an eye.” That which was assumed to be indivisible, the
pointlike instant of the moment, is shown opening out into more moments
to be explored and dissected in graphic physiological detail.
      :PROPERTIES:
      :CUSTOM_ID: throughout-the-story-the-act-of-dodging-into-the-interstices-of-time-is-intimately-related-to-that-important-physiological-and-philosophical-unit-of-time-the-blink-of-an-eye.-the-transformation-happening-behind-the-closed-eyelids-of-the-narrator-is-measured-in-terms-of-other-blinks-winks-and-twinkles.-all-that-he-does-while-the-potion-is-working-happens-as-far-as-the-rest-of-the-world-is-concerned-in-the-twinkling-of-an-eye.-that-which-was-assumed-to-be-indivisible-the-pointlike-instant-of-the-moment-is-shown-opening-out-into-more-moments-to-be-explored-and-dissected-in-graphic-physiological-detail.
      :END:

“we halted for a moment before a magnificent person in white flannels
and a Panama hat, who turned back to wink at two gaily dressed ladies...
A wink, studied with such leisurely deliberation as we could afford, is
an unattractive thing...One remarks that the winking eye does not
completely close, that under its drooping lid appears the lower edge of
an eyeball and a line of white. ‘Heaven give me memory,' said I, ‘and I
will never wink again.'”

Professor Gibberne and the narrator are nearly caught in a sticky
position when the potion wears off in a sudden moment of deceleration,
which is compared to the experience of being on a train as it draws into
a station. They stroll nonchalantly home, and the narrator reports that
Gibberne now sets as his task making his invention into a “manageable
convenience,” that can be marketed as “Gibberne's Nervous Accelerator”
in ascending strengths of 200, 900, and 2000, in small green bottles
“distinguished by yellow, pink, and white labels.” Furthermore, he plans
to invent a complementary “Retarder” for those who prefer glacial
inaction to acceleration.

At one point, the narrator suddenly hails the reader, by saying that the
very story that we have just been reading was written at one sitting
with the help of the accelerator, and took only six minutes of clock
time*. I*t is, not surprisingly, all fueled by digestion: the story was
written in six minutes -- but with a pause to eat some chocolate. It is
invaluable, writes the narrator to be able to obtain an uninterrupted
spell of work in a day full of engagement. Thus we see that the
fantastic experience and metaphysical wonder of the “absolute
acceleration of life” are only two facets of the story; the third is the
way in which the Accelerator and the Retarder are part of the time of
capitalism. Remember the inspiration for Gibberne's work was to find
something to help people cope with “these pushful days.” It is all the
times and speeds of the story -- its trains and crowds and hurrying that
makes such a potion a marketable device in the first place. The potion
is worth “a guinea a drop” if one is literally interested in buying
time. Gibberne says:

*“I know I'm giving the world something, and I think it only reasonable
we should expect the world to pay. The dignity of science is all very
well, but I think somehow I must have the monopoly of the stuff for,
say, ten years. I don't see why all the fun in life should go to the
dealers in ham.”*

So biotechnology begins. /*(SLIDE-OFF)*/

The body as a kind of time machine was an experimentally directed
extrapolation on nature. This, and other stories like it, bent and
warped time within narrative, with the body as the site of profitable
and productive alteration. We can postulate the possible real world
correlates for the accelerator: Freud, for example could be said to have
being carrying out an analogous project with cocaine...but I prefer to
see the story as itself a kind of potion, also worth “a guineau a drop,”
or is that a page. As we shall see, creating time-altering narratives of
the biological past, present and future turned out to be as lucrative
and popular as the imagined “nervous accelerator.”

*** Lang and /Metropolis/
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: lang-and-metropolis
    :END:

**** much less interesting project. future not as speculation on human
mutability, but as statement about the ultimate reducability of
social/class ocnflict to interpersonal/familial tensions. Demonic
Maschinenmensch as avatar of desctruction, crying out for the
reinstatement of an authentic humanity.
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: much-less-interesting-project.-future-not-as-speculation-on-human-mutability-but-as-statement-about-the-ultimate-reducability-of-socialclass-ocnflict-to-interpersonalfamilial-tensions.-demonic-maschinenmensch-as-avatar-of-desctruction-crying-out-for-the-reinstatement-of-an-authentic-humanity.
     :END:

*** Science Fiction: The Invention of the Future
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: science-fiction-the-invention-of-the-future
    :END:

**** power of this genre...
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: power-of-this-genre...
     :END:

** Filippo Tomassi Marinetti (1876-1944) and the Futurists
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: filippo-tomassi-marinetti-1876-1944-and-the-futurists
   :END:

*** History of Futurism
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: history-of-futurism
    :END:

*Futurism* was a [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/20th_century][20th
century]] [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Art][art]] movement. Although a
nascent Futurism can been seen surfacing throughout the very early years
of that century, the [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1907][1907]] essay
/Entwurf einer neuen Astetik der Tonkunst/ (Sketch of a New Aesthetic of
Music) by the [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Italy][Italian]]
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Composer][composer]]
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ferruccio_Busoni][Ferruccio Busoni]] is
sometimes claimed as its true jumping-off point. Futurism was a largely
Italian movement, although it also had adherents in other countries,
most notably [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russia][Russia]].

The Futurists explored every medium of art, including
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Painting][painting]],
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sculpture][sculpture]],
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poetry][poetry]],
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theatre][theatre]],
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Music][music]] and even
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cooking][gastronomy]]. The Italian poet
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Filippo_Tommaso_Marinetti][Filippo
Tommaso Marinetti]] was the first among them to produce a
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manifesto][manifesto]] of their artistic
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philosophy][philosophy]] in his
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Futurist_Manifesto][/Manifesto of
Futurism/]] ([[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1909][1909]]), first
released in [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milan][Milan]] and published
in the [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/France][French]] paper
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Le_Figaro][/Le Figaro/]]
([[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/February_20][February 20]]). Marinetti
summed up the major principles of the Futurists, including a passionate
loathing of ideas from the past, especially political and artistic
traditions. He and others also espoused a love of
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Speed][speed]],
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technology][technology]] and
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Violence][violence]]. The car, the plane,
the industrial town were all legendary for the Futurists, because they
represented the technological triumph of man over
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nature][nature]].

Marinetti's impassioned polemic immediately attracted the support of the
young Milanese [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Painter][painters]] -
Boccioni, Carrà, and Russolo - who wanted to extend Marinetti's ideas to
the [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visual_arts][visual
]][[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visual_arts][arts]] (Russolo was also a
composer, and introduced Futurist ideas into his compositions). The
painters Balla and Severini met Marinetti in 1910 and together these
artists represented Futurism's first phase.

The painter and sculptor
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umberto_Boccioni][Umberto Boccioni]]
([[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1882][1882]]-[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1916][1916]])
wrote the /Manifesto of Futurist Painters/ in
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1910][1910]] in which he vowed:

/We will fight with all our might the fanatical, senseless and snobbish
religion of the past, a religion encouraged by the vicious existence of
museums. We rebel against that spineless worshipping of old canvases,
old statues and old bric-a-brac, against everything which is filthy and
worm-ridden and corroded by time. We consider the habitual contempt for
everything which is young, new and burning with life to be unjust and
even criminal./

Futurists dubbed the love of the past "pastism", and its proponents
"pastists" (/cf./ [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stuckism][Stuckism]]).
They would sometimes even physically attack alleged pastists, in other
words, those who were apparently not enjoying Futurist exhibitions or
performances.

The Futurists' glorification of modern
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Warfare][warfare]] as the ultimate
artistic expression and their intense
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nationalism][nationalism]] allowed those
of them who survived [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I][World
War I]] to embrace Italian
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fascism][fascism]].

Futurism influenced many other 20th century art movements, including
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Art_Deco][Art Deco]],
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vorticism][Vorticism]],
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constructivism][Constructivism]] and
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surrealism][Surrealism]]. Futurism as a
coherent artistic movement is now regarded as extinct, having died out
in the 1920s; many of the Futurists were killed in two world wars, and
Futurism was, like
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Science_fiction][science fiction]], in
part overtaken by 'the future'. Nonetheless the ideals of futurism
remain as significant components of modern
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Western][Western]] culture; the emphasis
on youth, speed, power and technology finding expression in much of
modern commercial cinema and culture. Powerful echoes of Marinetti's
thought, especially his "dreamt-of metallization of the human body",
also remain in [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Japan][Japanese]] culture,
and surface in
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manga][manga]]/[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anime][anime]]
and the works of artists such as
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shinya_Tsukamoto][Shinya Tsukamoto]],
director of the "/Tetsuo/" (lit. "Ironman") films. Futurism has produced
several reactions, including the literary genre of
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyberpunk][cyberpunk]] - in which
technology was often treated with ambivalence - whilst artists who came
to prominence during the first flush of the internet, such as
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stelarc&action=edit][Stelarc]]
and
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mariko_Mori&action=edit][Mariko
Mori]], produce work which comments on futurist ideals.

[[[http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Futurism_%28art%29&action=edit&section=1][edit]]]

*** The Futurist Notion of Art, Technology, and the Future...
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: the-futurist-notion-of-art-technology-and-the-future...
    :END:

* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Lectures on WW1 and WW2 -- WW1 astonishingly has almost noghitn in it!

** Moral and Thermodynamic Equivalence
- William James (1842-1910): PSYCHOLOGIST, PHILOSOPHER, FOUNDER OF PRAGMATISM AND FUNCTIONAL PSYCHOLOGY, WIDE-RANGING PUBLIC INTELLECTUAL OF THE FIN-DE-sIECLE.
  - last published essay, form /McClure-s Magazine/, a prominent muckraking magazine, based on a talk given at Stanford in 1906, 
  - 

** Science in World War I

We've been discussng, at length, the period leading up to the First World War. Looming in the distance has been a great cataclysm: The Great War of 1914-1918. We haven't talked much about politics with a capital P in this class -- the kind of story I used to teach, for instance, in 19^{th} c Europe, about secret alliances, diplomatic manueverings, rising nationalism, etc. And I certainly don't intend to do anything of the sort today. Instead, I want to explore th First World War /as a technical system/; and  to look at some responses to that system -- in particular, responses that saw in the War and its prosecution the salvation of the world and the completion of the modernist project.

Probably no war in European history has ever been simultaneously so universally foreseen and so fundamentally miscomprehended. What was going on to make that misconception possible? How do we understand the cataclysm of the war? And in what ways is it related to the trends we've been tracing over the last semester? 

Before we start it helps to remember that the history of Europe is the history of a war-torn continent.  For centuries, powers great and small ravaged the landscape in conflicts the could last as long as, well, 100 years.  Why does the First World War stand out? 


#+begin_quote

#+end_quote
*** WWI as a technical system
We have talked about the state, science, and everyday life becoming wrapped up in each other.  We've seen it in thermodynamics, in evolutinary theory, in psychology, in industrialism itself. 

WW I is remembered as it is in part because these trends came together so powerfully in it. War is always catastrophic, and always "an immersive experience" for those who endure it; but it was around the First World War that the idea of /totale Mobilmachung/ came into existence. What did this mean?

- mass conscription on a scale that dwarfed the Napoleonic wars
- co-ordination of the full power of industrial production towards the aim of war & of sustaining/reproducing the military forces
- subjection of nation-level populations to co-ordinated propaganda effort using the new mechanically reproducible media
- deployment of scince & technology to create new kinds of devices, systems, and practices


**** The Science in World War I
- sonar
- tanks
- trenches
- medicine
- industrial engineering
- work science
- Mauss and the shovel 

**** Mobilization
- Rathenau, KriegsRohstoff Abteilung. Etienne Clementel, rationalization of industry
#+begin_quote
To many, the war seemed a vast improvement over the economic chaos and political divisiveness which had preceded it.  There now seem to be reasons to doubt whether the enthusiasm for the war was as widespread as the official picture portrayed it; in recent years, historians have used innovative methods to get beyond the monolithic picture imposed by press censorship and the heavy hand of government propaganda, suggesting that support for the war was more scattered and forced than it seems at first glance.1  Even with these caveats, though, there can be no question that the economic and political transformations effected by the war were impressive.  

The great military confrontations at the Somme and the Marne were the knife edge of a basically economic confrontation between the Central and Allied powers.  While soldiers fought and died on the Front, each alliance did its best to choke off the economic resources of the other and to step up its own production of armaments and military supplies.  The naval blockades and U-Boat campaigns were one face of this struggle; mobilization and reorganization of industry were another, and probably more important, visage.  In all the combatant nations, industrial production was pushed to unanticipated and unprecedented extremes, while the relations between  business interests and governments were tested and recast along lines which, while not altogether new, seemed to many to hold the seeds of radical change.

In particular, the experience of the Great War helped to consolidate technocratic1 impulses which had already begun to emerge before 1914.  The alliance between government and industry effected in Italy, Germany, France and England, whatever the many obstacles and difficulties it encountered, held out the promise of post-war extension of the planned economy.  In Germany, Walther Rathenau’s “War Raw Materials Division” (Kriegsrohstoffsabteilung, KRA) fixed the prices of raw materials and cemented the organization of heavy industry into state-directed cartel.  The French Minister of Commerce Étienne Clémentel oversaw the “rationalization” of French commerce and industry, aided by Albert Thomas and then Louis Loucheur in the Armaments division of the Ministry of War.  (diss, ch 1)

In Italy, G. Belluzzo “called for an eventual transformation of the state, to be preceded by industrial rationalization and concentration.”

Like James, these technocratic social engineers saw in the exigencies of war a model for the prosecution of peace.  War had forced the state to take on an important role in organizing industry, and had led to unprecedented efficiencies and productivity; if wartime economic structures could only, in the leisure of peacetime, be rationally reconfigured, the postwar period might see the rise of a “new society” more just, more productive, more vigorous  and manly than anything that had come before.  Some of these reformers, like Rathenau and the French Munitions Minister Albert Thomas, came from the moderate left; others, like Clémentel and Rathenau’s second-in-command and AEG colleague Wichard von Moellendorf, from the right.  Their political differences only highlight the fact that a scientistic current ran beneath a wide range of political thought, and that the prosecution of war served as a very general model for the prosecution of peace.

Both Rathenau and Moellendorf hoped that the wartime experience could serve as a model for the organization of the economy in peacetime.  As early as 1916 Rathenau announced that the hardships of the war had taught the German people that “economics is no longer a matter for individuals, but a matter for the ‘whole’ [Gesamtheit].”1   For this reason, the State — the representation of the Whole — would need to move into a closer relationship with industry, on the model of the cooperation seen in the KRA and War Corporations.  The State, moreover, had to come to grips with the 

fact that “the war, with its consequence, the Peace, has... destroyed the great questions of political Politics”; in the new world, fashioned by war but prosecuted peacefully, the primary concern of the State would be economic.  Moellendorf agreed: in a famous memo entitled “Planwirtschaft [Planned Economy],” he advocated the central administration of economic affairs through bodies based on the War Corporations.  As the historian Charles Maier puts it, The institutional models for Planwirtschaft were borrowed primarily from Germany’s wartime organization, including the war corporations of mixed state and private ownership that Rathenau had seen as a stage between capitalism and state socialism. 1
It is precisely this phenomenon, where new forms of political and economic organization developed during the war were deployed in the postwar period, to which I mean to call attention.
#+end_quote



*** Utopias of the World Wars
*** The Utopian Project  & Social Engineering 
*** A Pragmatic Psychology
*** totale Mobilmaching
*** Social and military Order 
** Information and the new sciences of World War II.

We have moved very rapidly through an enormously tumultuous period of history -- not just politically, but scientifically. Quantum mechanics, darwinian synthesis, chemical developments, Bing Bang theory (Gamow); invention of systems ecology, predator-prey dynamics, etc. All of these developments have implications we could bring into play here, but won't.

In last two weeks -- admitting we skimmed through totalitarin period -- seen development of true high modernist regimes. Among other characteristics, shared faith in the capacity of a central administration to apply scientific principles using a reliable technological apparatus to:

-impose legibility on the national territory

-extract resources efficiently

-pacify the populace

-accomplish dramatic, revolutionary goals which could radically reshape
politics & the futureo f the human species

-manufacture a spiritually improved strain of human species

In this effort they built on ideas that were prominent in war time, in some cases (esp. Nazi) in attempt to recapture the glorious solidarity of those days. These ideas were themselves built upon the Utopian impulse of the previous century. IN all of this the totalitarian states were not laone; glorious projects aimed at improvement of race, at abolition of poverty, &c. implemented all over the world, e.g. early public housing projects, work projects like CCC in USA. Period leading up to WW2 is /heyday/ of philosophical, technical, political modernism.

In some ways our course should really stop here. We've come to the end of the Age of the Machine: the era governed by the image of Steam Engine, by the prospect of infinite progress, the fear of degeneration, the uninhibited aspiration to reshape the human race n pursuit of perfection.

Or: come to the moment when these dreams undergo a sudden transformation, when the geography of hope & dispair flexes & twists, to produce a new kind of modernism, a new set of promises and boundaries. WW2 is the cusp of this transformation. Out of the fires of war new sciences, new struggles, & new visions emerge. This transformaiton is complex & uneven; it takes a long time coming. Any account of it is necessarily reductive & oversimplifying; but can say that the heart of this transformaiton is a shift from the stema engine to the ocmputer; form energy to informaiton.

Dominant metaphor for everything in c. 19 fwas the machine: mechanical models of the economy; society as a mechanism; body as machine. This powerful set of analogies will not disappear; but it will be first /augmented / and then, in many domains, overthrown by the image of the computer. The mind becomes an informaiton processing machine; society, a set of interacting systems of information flow; life, a code. How is the machine age replaced by the age of information?

Answer lies in the heart of WW 2, tho can ge further back as well.
Here's a partial retelling of the story:

*** Manichean Sciences

when think of sci & ww2, usually think of a-bomb. Not trivial.

-power/knowledge as pure destruction

However, in prosecution of war other sciences vastly more important.

-most central tech innovation of war: RADAR. Technology of legibility. RadLab at MIT.

Other sciences of legibility also developed. Operaitons Research. (sub finding. Increasing kill ratios). Later used in management issues (production, etc). Merges to some extent w/ Taylorist work science to become Industrial Engineering...

Game Theory: How to predict enemy's nextm ove?

Cybernetics: science of Communication and Control in Animal and Machine. AA-predictor.

All aimed at using mathematics to maximize chance of knowing enemy's next move. Render enemy space legible to interests of military. In this way WW2 is essential experience.

History of Information Theory:

1939: Claude Shannon: information as entropy. Physical defn of information allows math thy of informaiton; quantities of info first discussed. Out of ATT.

Cybernetics:

Wiener: (1894-1964)

 AA-predictor

physiological researches.

Teleology.

Applications to all kinds of fields.

Meanwhile, parallel history re: computers.

(Turing: 1912-1954)

Turing: 1930's, pursuit of Goedel & computability,

In 1936 he published /On Computable Numbers, with an application to the Entscheidungsproblem./ It is in this paper that Turing introduced an abstract machine, now called a "Turing machine", which moved from one state to another using a precise finite set of rules (given by a finite table) and depending on a single symbol it read from a tape.

The Turing machine could write a symbol on the tape, or delete a symbol from the tape. Turing wrote [13]:-

/Some of the symbols written down will form the sequences of figures which is the decimal of the real number which is being computed. The others are just rough notes to "assist the memory". It will only be these rough notes which will be liable to erasure./

He defined a computable number as real number whose decimal expansion could be produced by a Turing machine starting with a blank tape. He showed that was computable, but since only countably many real numbers are computable, most real numbers are not computable. He then described a number which is not computable and remarks that this seems to be a paradox since he appears to have described in finite terms, a number which cannot be described in finite terms. However, Turing understood the source of the apparent paradox. It is impossible to decide (using another Turing machine) whether a Turing machine with a given table of instructions will output an infinite sequence of numbers.

In math: ufndamental importance.

For us: invents the informaiton machine. Turing Machine can represent any other machine. Build one, it can calculate anything. Odes this at Bletchley Park. ENIGMA/ULTRA conflict. Churchill characterization.

Estrogen therapy. Turing Test. Suicide.

Synthesis: realtime, ocntrol. ENIAC, Whirlwind, SABRE, electronic
battlefield, smart bombs.



* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): New Media System: ca. 1900

We started this course with the steam engine. Soon we'll approach its
climax -- the First World Warr -- and move on to its denouement -- the
sciences of World War II, the invention of informaiton, fand the advent
of the information age: the era in which all things can be translated in
to each other, fand in which all questions have an answer that is
simultaneously mathematical and symbolic. Today's lectures fare about
the constellation of forces that made it possible to trnasform the power
of coal and steam into the power of bits and transitors.

One of the most remarkable features of the steam engine was its effect
on space and time -- shrinking space, contracting time. Suddenly places
that seemed far apart in time were rendered closer. The telegrpah
accelerated this sense of time's transformation, with the instantaneous
transmission of messages across vast distances.

We'll see next week how twentieth-century mathematicians dramatically
redefined the very idea of “space”; while a physicist named Albert
Einstein demolished the ufndamental stability of both space and time.

But in a sense these scientists fwere already far too late. At the very
end of the ninettenth century, two technologies slew time forever. Thewy
were the phonograph, and cinema.

Etienne Jhuiles Marey fhad used the graphic method and the
chronophotograph to trnasform fleeting motions into static images: lines
traced on rotating cylinders, patterns burnt by light onto the blank
surface of a photogrpahic plate. His goal was to render time visible, to
conquier the movements of nature through the judicious application of
technology.

Marey was one of the most prolific and well-respected inventors on the
other side of the Atlantic. Over here we had Thomas Alva Edison -- b.
1847, soin of a carpenter (like naother famous son) , by age 10 an
inventor, and

[[http://www.incwell.com/Biographies/Sp1.gif]]From 1862 to 1868, Edison
worked as a roving telegrapher in the Midwest, the South, Canada, and
New England. During this time, he began developing a telegraphic
repeating instrument that made it possible to transmit messages
automatically. By 1869, Edison's inventions, including the duplex
telegraph and message printer, were progressing so well, he left
telegraphy and began a career of full-time inventing and
entrepreneurship.\\

Mythical figure, invented 1877: phongrpah; 1879: electric lightbulb;
1893 moving pictures (1894, Kinetoscope) 1911: Disc phonograph; 1913
kinetophone. 99% 1%.

details of life unimportant for now. What matters: Edison, often
simultaneously with other people who did it better, invented the modern
media system: the system which erased once and for all the primacy of
print as the system ofi nformation transfer. With the earliest tinfoil
phongraphs and the jerkey, awkward motions of the kinetoscope, Marey's
project was rendered complete. Now a complete record could be kept of
all trnasient events, of all the moved in the air or was visible to the
eye. sound and vision -- the two most important senses -- were rendered
mechanical.

McLuhan's “Gutenberg galaxy” replaced by “Ansalog Universe” -- in which
waves of light could burn themselvdes onto film, or waves of sound could
etch themselves into metal.

“our writing tools are laso workingo n our thoughts” (Nietzsche)

persistence of vision

psychoacoustics:

Friedlander, 1916: Goethe speaks into the phonograph” (kittler59ff)

(love of the author. hallucination and reality). immortalization of the
idol.

Rilke, 1919: Primal sounds (kittler 38ff)

Nietsche 1882: On the origin of poetry: In those ancient times in which
poetry came into existence, the aim was uytility... when one lets rhythm
permeate speech...the rythmic force ... bids one choose one's words with
care.... “at the origin ofg poetry, with its beats, rythms, fand rhymes,
were technological problems and a solution for oral cultures.

rendering speech mechanical -- cf psychoanalysis as mechanical ystem of
inputs nado utputs..

Radio: analog transmission of the voice... Hertz, 1888, production of
invisible waves; Guglieomo Marconi, 1895 ff. de forest 1915;

fessenden 1906 (voice transmission)...

Film: language of the unconscious. Conquering of time. Trick film fas
essential to the whole story. cutting, montage, special effects
(doppelgaenger)juenger and death (132ff).

-muensterberg: The eye does not receive the impressions of true
movement.. It is only a suggestion of movement, and the idea of motion
is to a high degree the product of our own reaction... the theather has
both depth and motion, wthout any subjective help; the screen has tne
and hey lacks them. We see things distant and moving, but we furnish to
them more than few receive; we create the depth and the continuity
through our mental mechanism.

psychotechnology: insight that eveyday reality itslef.. has long been a
lab in its own right.... each psychic apparatus is also a technological
one, and vbice versa.

cinema as psocyloglical experiment. .... theater... subject to the
conditions of an external reality they imitate space,time,causality....
film... ocmpletely independent aesthetically and need not imitate
hteater... assembles reality from psychological mechanism... film...
instantiates the neurologi8cal flow of data.

or Bergson: (1907, creative evolution)

whether we would htinkg beocming, or express it, or even perceive it, we
hardly do anything else than set going a kind of cinematograph inside
us... we may ttherefore sum up what we have been saying in the
conclusion that the mechanism of our ordinary knowledge is of a
cinematographic al kind.... we take snapshits of the passing reality...
which are ... recomposed artivfically....

Friednaender, “Fata morgana machina” (1920)

Typewriter: the automation of writing. Notthe spiriti, but the whirrings
of a mechanical mind.... Automatic writing, gertrude stein.
self-experimentation, writing as the ultimate self-experimentation...
modernism. rules of sombination of signs.

Typeriter as digital machine. symbolic manipulatin. Road to COLOSSUS,
Tuting machine, ocmputer.

[[http://www.incwell.com/Biographies/Sp1.gif]]


* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Extremely brief math notes (modernism)
Carnap:

“Scientific knowledge is objective solely in virtue of its formal or
structural properties, and these properties are expressed through the
'places' of items of knowledge within a single unified system of
knowledge.”

Dedekind:

The numbers are free creations of the human spirit; they serve as a
means to make the differentness of things easier to understand... If one
follows closely what we do when we count, one is led to examine the
capacity of the mind [Geist] to relate things to things... whithout
which no thinking at all is possible. The whole science of numbers must
be erected on this single, but entirely necessary foundation.

“I understand by a 'thing' each object of our thought. In order to be
able to speak about things, we mark them with signs, for instance
through letters... A thing a is the same as b, and b the same as a, when
everythin, that can be thought about a, can also be thought about b, and
when everything, that is true for b, is also true for a”

Klein: 'Intuition' of numbers

Hilbert:

“We imagine 3 different systems of things: the things of the first
system we call points, and write A,B,C...; the things of the seocnd
system we call lines and write a,b,c; the things of the third system we
call planes and write alpha,beta,gamma... We imagine the points, lines,
and planes in particular mutual relations and denote these relationships
through words like “lies”, “between”, parallel”, “Congruent”; the exact
and full description of these relationships is acocmplished through the
axioms of geometry.

If I take as my points any system whatsoever of things, for instance,
love, law, chimney-sweep... and then take my axiomss as the relations
between these things, then my propositions whill be true for thesee
things as well.”



* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): Old Final Lecture: Practical Knowledge
Final Lecture: Practical Knowledge

Reflections on what we've accomplished.

This course has been an erratic, idiosyncratic, and unconventional survey of the history of science in the period 1776-1918. Aim of course is not to transmit a body of knowledge, but to investigate a cluster of interrelated problems, and hopefully develop in the process a set of analytical tools for thinking about the relation between science and society.

What holds the modern period together? Been lots of answers proposed, of course; but most of them focus in one way or another on science and technology: the capacity to undertand the world and to control it. Modernity as knowledge, modernity as power.

I'm fundamentally uncomfortable with much of this narrative, esp. the inevitability, the hierarchies, its strong ties to imperialism, subjugation, exercise of force. Manifest Destiny, eminent domain, the will to power.  And yet I'm also clearly committed to it: I believe that the form of knowledge we have separates us from other times, other places; that the vastly increased capacity to manipulate the physical world has had immense, and sometimes catastrophic, consequences.

I've tried throughout to complicate the issue by doing two things at once:

- laying out some of the revolutionary knowledge, & the immense technological dev'ts, of that century and a half:
  - highlights: cons. Energy, mechanist biology, thy of nat sel, statistical reasoning, Freudian psychology;
  - Steam Engine, telegraph, photography, machine guns, computers.

- posing the question of what each of these developments /meant/ to the inhabitants of the past. B/c these new theories, these new machines, not only /physically/ transformed the world; they transformed people's notions of /what it meant to be modern/, in ways that were not always entirely predictable. So Steam Engine became model for society/body; to be modern was to understand the importance of energy, to seek ever greater efficiencies and productive power. 2^{nd} Law not only gave thy of heat transfer, but vision of the broad course of human & cosmological history, & the duty of civilization to build world up before it ran down. Nat Selection not only dramatically changed sense of living creatures, of their relations & history; but also gave new biological imperative to stories about difference btwn White Race & other inhabitants of the globe, raised spectre of new technical means for manipulation of human nature itself.

So course hasn't been objective look at how modernity arose; not, as I said, a body of knowledge. & while I care deeply about the particular, material impacts of science and technology on all our lives, I probably care much more about the sense of the world & our place in it; of the tempo and direction of history; of right and wrong action, that science and technology have produced. I'm not entirely enthusiastic about the legacy this history has bequeathed to us; but we live, inescapably, in a world made for us by s&t, so it would be futile to try to escape it -- to try and live outside of scientific reason, outside the effects of large technological systems. Even out in the woods, it's hard to live without screwdrivers, standardized tools; I'd like to live without oil, but my bike is made of advanced c.21 materials & needs petroleum lubricant to run. Impossible /not/ to use concepts like energy, evolution, /normalcy/, in making ordinary, everyday judgments about what to do, what we /should/ do. 

So even if I'm often critical of modernism, I have learned, over the decades, to shield myself against the temptation of a rejectionist ideology. Point is not to /step outside/ of modernity, to gain an objective viewpoint /beyond/ the horizons of the present; but, instead, to disturb the complacency with which we tend to view the world around us; to suggest that things could have been different, that they have been different, that much of what /seems/ self-evident to us today needn't have been so. That is, aim is to destroy the complacency and self-satisfaction with which we view the accomplishments of Western civilization, and ask how we might do better. This means, among other things, integrating the experience of totalitarianism into our sense of modernity, & seeing the commonalities that totalitarian vision shares with our own best hopes and desires.

# Brings us to our reading this week. 

One theme running throughout the course has been the importance of relationship btwn science & state.

*** Legibility

*** Utopianism. 
- Stalins and Pol Pots and Koch Brothers and Rupert Murdoch are one thing; cynics who purposefully aim to produce human suffering. 
- Elon Musks and Sergey Brins and Steve Jobs' and Mark Zuckerbergs are another. Aiming to create a better world, they give us new monstrosities.

*** Thin simplifications.

Episteme, Techne, metis.

**** Oak leaves and Squirrel Ears
- planting corn 


Institutions that acknowledge, build upon practical knowledge. Plans for development that refuse the temptation of knowing what kind of person someone else should be. Openness to contingency, to failure. Humility in face of ocmplexities not only of natural world, but of social world; willingness to step down from the pedestal.


* Lecture {{{n}}} ({{{ts}}}): COMMENT Local Variables                          

* COMMENT Variables

#+begin_src emacs-lisp
file-local-variables-alist
#+end_src

#+RESULTS:
: ((org-reveal-auto-export-on-save . t) (org-time-stamp-custom-formats <%b. %d> . <%Y-%m-%d %H:%M>) (org-mwp-classtimes-calibrate <2019-01-03 Thu> <2019-01-01 Tue>))

* 

# Local Variables:
# org-reveal-auto-export-on-save: t
# org-time-stamp-custom-formats: ("<%b. %d>" . "<%Y-%m-%d %H:%M>")
# org-mwp-classtimes-calibrate: ("<2019-01-03 Thu>" "<2019-01-01 Tue>" )
# End:
